Title: Robust Assamese Speech Recognition through Controlled Fine-Tuning of Whisper Models

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2607.17164v1

Published Time: Tue, 21 Jul 2026 01:03:07 GMT

Number of Pages: 31

Markdown Content:
# Highlights 

## Robust Assamese Speech Recognition through Controlled Fine-Tuning of Whis-per Models 

Ganapati Das, Dwipen Laskar, Hasin Afzal Ahmed, Sanjib Kr Kalita, Kshirod Sarmah, Hem Chandra Das, Manjula Kalita • Development of a controlled fine-tuning framework of Whisper-Small with optimized hyperparameters to Automatically Recogninize low-resource Assamese Speech • Strategic use of unvalidated crowd-sourced speech data for data augmentation • Establishment of a performance benchmark for Whisper-Small in Assamese speech recognition. • Qualitative analysis of orthographic and morphological errors. arXiv:2607.17164v1 [cs.LG] 19 Jul 2026 Robust Assamese Speech Recognition through Controlled Fine-Tuning of Whisper Models 

## Ganapati Das a,1 , Dwipen Laskar a,<,1 , Hasin Afzal Ahmed a,1 , Sanjib Kr Kalita a,1 ,Kshirod Sarmah b,1 , Hem Chandra Das c,1 and Manjula Kalita d,1 

> a

Department of Computer Science, Gauhati University, Guwahati, 781014, Assam, India 

> b

Department of Computer Science, Pandit Deendayal Upadhyaya Adarsha Mahavidyalaya, Goalpara, 783101, Assam, India 

> c

Department of Computer Science and Technology, Bodoland University, Kokrajhar, 783370, Assam, India 

> d

Department of Computer Science and Engineering, Girijananda Chowdhury University, Guwahati, 781017, Assam, India 

A R T I C L E I N F O 

Keywords :Automatic Speech Recognition Low-resource languages Fine-tuning Whisper Speech-to-Text Multilingual models 

A B S T R A C T 

Developing Automatic Speech Recognition (ASR) for morphologically rich, low-resource languages such as Assamese is challenging due to insufficient annotated speech data. The pretrained Whisper model performs poorly on Assamese speech recognition tasks. This paper presents a controlled, fine-tuned Whisper-based Assamese ASR system trained on the Mozilla Common Voice 24.0-Assamese corpus. A hardware-aware optimized training pipeline is implemented for resource-constrained environments, employing mixed-precision training and gradient accu-mulation on Tesla 4 Graphics Processing Units (T4 GPUs). The proposed fine-tuned model significantly outperformed the Zero-shot baseline, yielding Word Error Rate (WER), Character Error Rate (CER), Match Error Rate (MER), and Word Infomation Loss (WIL) of 43.17%, 13.18%, 43%, and 64.81%, respectively, achieving significant relative improvements of 78.26%, 93.10%, 57.0%, and 35.19% over the baseline. Semantic evaluation of the fine-tuned model also demonstrates notable improvement over a zero baseline, attaining Bilingual Evaluation Under-study (BLEU) and Metric for Evaluation of Translation with Explicit ORdering (METEOR) scores of 30.81 and 0.5262, respectively. Additionally, the predicted hallucination rate and Real-Time Factor (RTF) are substantially improved by 96.70% and 32.38%, compared to the zero-shot baseline. 

## 1. Introduction 

In the age of Artificial Intelligence (AI), Automatic Speech Recognition (ASR) plays a vital role in numerous applications, including automatic video captioning, voice assistants, transcription services, and chatbots (Magalhães, Vasconcelos, Fernandes, Cruz, Sampaio, de Macêdo and da Silva, 2022). This makes ASR a crucial bridge to facilitate more effective human-human and human-machine communication (Yu and Deng, 2015; Sourav, Javaid and Cheng, 2025). Out of over 7000 languages globally, ASR systems focus on only a few dominant languages. Currently, ASR research has made remarkable progress in languages with high resources, such as English, Mandarin, Spanish, French, German, Japanese, Persian, Russian, Romanian, and Turkish (Leben, 2018; Liu, Yang and Qu, 2024). These languages attracted development due to their high economic value (Kaur, Singh and Kadyan, 2021). Despite breakthroughs, many languages still lag in terms of the availability of high-quality ASR models, especially those with fewer digital resources (Javed, Doddapaneni, Raman, Bhogale, Ramesh, Kunchukuttan, Kumar and Khapra, 2022). This disparity highlights the need for focused research and development to build robust ASR systems for low-resource 

> ⋆
> <

Corresponding author 

ganapatidas@gauhati.ac.in (G. Das); laskardwipen@gauhati.ac.in (D. Laskar); hasin@gauhati.ac.in (H.A. Ahmed); sanjib959@gauhati.ac.in (S.K. Kalita); kshirodsarmah@gmail.com (K. Sarmah); hemchandradas78@gmail.com 

(H.C. Das); manjula_cse@gcuniversity.ac.in (M. Kalita) 

orcid (s): 0009-0008-2378-027X (G. Das); 0000-0001-6081-4338 (D. Laskar); 0009-0004-9070-3232 (H.A. Ahmed); 

0000-0002-0576-3010 (S.K. Kalita); 0009-0006-8780-5689 (K. Sarmah); 0000-0002-1142-4605 (H.C. Das); 

0009-0003-6170-9160 (M. Kalita) 

> 1

These authors contributed equally to this work. 

: Preprint submitted to arXiv Page 1 of 30 languages (LRLs) such as Assamese, Odia, Bodo, etc. These LRLs lack sufficient linguistic data and resources for effective processing in natural language processing (NLP). Assamese is an Indo-Aryan language having distinct phonological features that make its a speech unique language. It originated from Vedic dialects, and likely developed through Apabhraṃśa from the Magadhi Prakrit of the eastern group of Sanskritic languages. (Sarma and Sarma, 2012). The Assamese language is spoken by a significant population (approximately 15 million) in the northeastern region of India (Moral, 1997; Burling, 2003). Although most Assamese speakers reside in the state of Assam, it is also prevalent in neighbouring North-Eastern states. Some Assamese speakers are also found in Bhutan (Mahanta, 2012). It is one of the Indo-European languages among the 22 scheduled languages in India and is designated as a “Classical Indian Language” by the Government of India in October 2024 (Sarma, 2025). The Assamese language uses 41 consonants and 11 vowels. There are 20-23 consonant phonemes and 8 distinct vowel phonemes according to the International Phonetic Association (IPA) (Mahanta, 2012). Acoustic modelling for Assamese ASR systems faces several challenges due to its rich phonemic inventory and the absence of phonemic vowel length distinctions (Sarma and Sarma, 2014). The stress patterns and intonational properties of Assamese further add to the language’s complexity. The Assamese language uses overt case marking and a nominative-accusative case system. The language also uses a complex classifier system to categorize nouns by size, shape, animacy, and degree of respect (Saikia and Camilleri, 2019). Phonetic variations across dialects are another challenge in developing ASR models for Assamese (Das and Bhattacharjee, 2024). The development of ASR models for Assamese languages remains constrained by the scarcity of annotated speech data and suboptimal model adaptation. Due to its limited representation in publicly accessible speech datasets, the Assamese language, spoken by a sizable population in northeastern India, poses challenges for ASR development. According to recent research, multilingual models such as Whisper and Wav2Vec-BERT can accommodate low-resource languages by using knowledge transfer from high-resource languages (Liang, Khaw, Liew, Tan and Qin, 2025). Fine-tuning such pre-trained models on language-specific data can further improve their performance, targeting the specific phonetic and linguistic features of the target language (Singh, Mehta, Nanavati, Bandekar, Basumatary, Badiger, Udupa, Kumar, Ghosh, Pai et al., 2023). Another challenge in natural language generation is hallucination (Ji, Lee, Frieske, Yu, Su, Xu, Ishii, Bang, Madotto and Fung, 2023). Although hallucination is a psychological term often referred to as unreal perception, its definition holds in natural language generation. Characteristics of the Assamese language are prone to several types of hallucination. As Assamese is an agglutinative language, in which suffixes are added to root words to form complex words, it is prone to morphological hallucination. Due to limited resources for finetuning, this often leads to Lexical and Phonetic Fabrications (Koudounas, La Quatra, Giollo, Siniscalchi and Baralis, 2025). Recent advances in multilingual speech recognition have enabled the development of powerful pretrained models such as Whisper. While these models demonstrate strong performance across many languages, their effectiveness for low-resource languages such as Assamese remains limited due to insufficient language-specific training data and complex linguistic characteristics. Assamese speech presents additional challenges including rich morphology, dialectal variations, and the presence of conjunct characters (Juktaxar), which complicate phoneme-to-grapheme mapping in automatic transcription. Moreover, pretrained multilingual models often generate hallucinated outputs when applied to languages with limited representation in their training data (Koenecke, Choi, Mei, Schellmann and Sloane, 2024). These challenges highlight the need for a systematic investigation into controlled fine-tuning strategies that adapt Whisper to Assamese speech while improving transcription reliability and reducing hallucination. Additionally, the availability of a controlled fine-tuning pipeline for Automatic Speech Recognition (ASR) models to transcribe low-resource Assamese language would greatly benefit various applications, including education, healthcare, and government services, by enabling speech-based interfaces and improving content accessibility (Javed et al., 2022). Motivated by these challenges, this study explores a controlled fine-tuning pipeline for Whisper-based Assamese ASR using publicly available, Mozilla Common Voice 24.0-Assamese dataset. The key contributions of this study are summarized as follows: (i) Development of a controlled fine-tuning framework with optimized hyper-parameters to mitigate hallucination in Assamese ASR. (ii) Strategic use of unvalidated crowd-sourced speech data as a data augmentation resource to improve model robustness.    

> :Preprint submitted to arXiv Page 2 of 30 Figure 1: Timeline of Automatic Speech Recognition History (1877-2025)

(iii) Establishment of a performance benchmark for Whisper-Small in Assamese speech recognition. (iv) Qualitative analysis of orthographic and morphological errors, highlighting key challenges in Assamese ASR. The remainder of this paper is organized as follows. Section 2 provides a review of related works in ASR, with a focus on models and datasets used for low-resource languages, particularly for Assamese. The transformer-based structure of the Whisper model is presented in Section 3. Section 4 presents details on the dataset used in study, including pre-processing, and augmentation techniques used. The evaluation metrics used to assess the model’s performance are discussed in Section 5. Section 6 illustrates the proposed methodology. Experimental results are presented in Section 7. Section 8 concludes and proposes directions for future research. Finally, the limitations of the proposed approach are presented in Section 9. 

## 2. Related Works 

The foundation for the development of modern Automatic Speech Recognition (ASR) systems began in early 1879, when Thomas Edison introduced his speech-dictation machine. Although this machine could not recognize speech as modern ASR systems do, it was one of the first inventions to record and replay human voices (Rabiner and Juang, 2006). The first true ASR, viz. “Audrey” was built by Davis et al. of Bell Laboratories in 1952 for the recognition of isolated digits by a single speaker (Davis, Biddulph and Balashek, 1952). In the early 1970s, Carnegie Mellon University developed the “Harpy” system as a part of the Speech Understanding Research (SUR) program funded by the Defense Advanced Research Projects Agency (DARPA), U.S.A. This system successfully recognized continuous speech with a vocabulary of 1,011 words and achieved reasonable accuracy at that time (Lowerre, 1990). The field of Automatic Speech Recognition (ASR) has undergone a revolutionary transformation, driven primarily by advances in deep learning technologies. The shift from traditional acoustic models, such as Gaussian Mixture Models (GMMs) and Hidden Markov Models (HMMs), to end-to-end neural network systems has resulted in a significant improvement in transcription quality. The advent of large transformer-based models has established new performance boundaries, as they exhibit an outstanding capacity to generalize across domains and dialects (Rabiner, 1989). Figure 1 depicts some major milestones in ASR. ASR systems for large-resource languages have achieved remarkable success due to the availability of extensive labelled datasets and computational resources (Rabiner, 1989; Baevski, Zhou, Mohamed and Auli, 2020). These systems are capable of producing near-human transcription accuracy and strong generalization across domains. In contrast, developing ASR systems for low-resource languages poses many challenges, viz., limited annotated speech data, lack of pronunciation lexicons, dialectal variation, and scarce textual resources (Radford, Kim, Xu, Brockman, McLeavey and Sutskever, 2023). Limited works have been reported, and it is becoming an active field of research nowadays. Implementation of OpenAI’s Whisper model is found in LRLs such as Hakka (Chinese) (Chen, Hsu and Chang, 2023), Javanese (Timmel, Paonessa, Vogel, Perruchoud and Kakooee, 2024), Swahili(or Kiswahili) (Sharma, Pandya and Shukla, 2025), and Portuguese (Perezhohin, Santos, Costa, Peres and Castelli, 2024). Implementations of the Whisper model for certain Indian low-resource languages (LRLs), such as Rajasthani (Bhandari and Harit, 2026), and Kannada (Prasad,   

> :Preprint submitted to arXiv Page 3 of 30

Rao, Naidu et al., 2026), have been reported in the literature. However, to the best of our knowledge, no such work has been reported for the Assamese language. Some existing works on Automatic Speech Recognition (ASR) are discussed below. Sarma et al. (Sarma and Sarma, 2011) evaluated an Assamese numeral speech recognition system using a hybrid Artificial Neural Network (ANN) that combines Self Organising Maps (SOM) and Multi-Layer Perceptrons (MLP) across diverse recording environments (noiseless, noise mixed, stressed, and stress-free), diverse speaker gender and their emotional states. Medhi and Talukdar (Medhi and Talukdar, 2015) created an isolated-word ASR system for Assamese using 40,000 total utterances and 100 commonly used words, recorded by 20 speakers (10 men and 10 women). They used k-means to cluster feature vectors, trained an MLP with a single hidden layer, and extracted Zero Crossing Rate, Short-Time Energy, and 12 MFCCs from 25 ms frames. The system demonstrated the efficacy of combining acoustic features with neural networks for isolated Assamese word recognition, despite difficulties in generalising to new speakers, achieving approximately 99% accuracy in speaker-dependent tests and approximately 93% in speaker-independent recognition. Shahnawazuddin et al. (Shahnawazuddin, Thotappa, Sarma, Deka, Prasanna and Sinha, 2013) design the first deployable moderate-vocabulary Assamese spoken query system for farmers to access the latest agricultural commodity prices via telephone. The integrated ASR model achieved a WER of 15.99% and 6.13% for Commodity names and District names, respectively. Bharali and Kalita (Bharali and Kalita, 2021) used HTK and HMMs to implement a speaker-independent isolated-word recogniser for Assamese digits 0–9, comparing four acoustic feature sets—LPC, LPC cepstral, mel-filterbank, and MFCC—each with variations such as energy, delta, and acceleration coefficients. The system was tested on data from 15 speakers and achieved up to 80% accuracy with 39-dimensional MFCC features and a 7-state, 5-hidden-state HMM on clean data, and 95% accuracy with 26-dimensional LPC cepstral features under noisy conditions. This shows that MFCCs perform best in clean environments, while LPC cepstral features perform best after noise removal. Agarwalla et al. (Agarwalla and Sarma, 2016) explore machine learning techniques for automatic speech recognition (ASR) using Assamese dialectal speech. The research focuses on using various architectures, including Multi-Layer Perceptron (MLP), Deep Neural Network (DNN), Recurrent Neural Network (RNN), and Fully Focused Time Delay Neural Network (FFTDNN). FFTDNN achieved the highest performance, with Word Recognition Accuracy (WRA) of 95–96%, outperforming the other architectures. Sarma et al.(Sarma, Saharia and Sharma, 2017) built a speech-to-text module with a DNN–HMM hybrid acoustic model. The model achieved 78.05% word-level accuracy in continuous speech recognition, trained on 3 hours of training data and 0.5 hours of test data. Deka et al. (Deka, Nirmala and Samudravijaya, 2018) developed a continuous speech recognition (CSR) system for Assamese using a speech corpus of 5,658 utterances from 27 speakers. The proposed DNN-HMM Assamese CSR achieves around 95.7% word recognition accuracy using scripted speech compared to GMM-HMM and SGMM-HMM (Subspace Gaussian Mixture Models Hidden Markov Models). Dutta et al.(Dutta, Choudhury and Barman, 2022) developed an Assamese speech-based vocabulary identification system using a CNN by collecting 35 isolated words from ten speakers. Using MFCC, spectral centroid, zero-crossing rate, chroma frequencies, spectral roll-off, and intensity features, and comparing CNN against a feed-forward ANN, the CNN achieved 98.4% accuracy, significantly outperforming the ANN’s 86.4%. Various LSTM and BiLSTM-based (Kalita, Borbora and Nath, 2022) speech recognition systems have been reported, with WER varying between 18.60% and 18.84%. Chen W. et. al.(Chen, Chu, Li and Kawahara, 2024), fine-tuned an XLSR-53 (cross-lingual speech representations -53) in Marathi, Assamese, and Punjabi from the Common Voice 16.1 corpora. A fine-tuned ASR model achieved the best CER of 19.21% on the Assamese language. Chen et al. (Chen, Tian, Peng, Yan, Yang and Watanabe, 2025) also reported a reduction in WER / CER from 65.5 to 29.4 for Assamese using all OWLS models. 

## 3. Model Architecture 

OpenAI’s Whisper model is a weakly supervised speech processing model that can perform multiple tasks, including ASR, language recognition, speech translation, and speech activity detection, across nearly                           

> :Preprint submitted to arXiv Page 4 of 30 Table 1
> Versions of Whisper Family
> Model No. of Layers Feature Dimensions Attention Heads Parameters
> Tiny 4384 639M Base 6512 874M Small 12 768 12 244M Medium 24 1024 16 769M Large 32 1280 20 1150M

100 languages (Liu et al., 2024). The capabilities of Whisper on high-resource languages are exceptional, but the same is not true for low-resource languages like Assamese (Polat, Turan, Koçak and Ulaş, 2024; Liu et al., 2024). The developer has pre-trained the model using a massive multilingual dataset of 680,000 hours for weakly supervised audio (Radford et al., 2023). It has been observed that, for certain languages, Whisper achieves transcription performance that is comparable to, and in some cases exceeds, human-level accuracy under controlled evaluation settings. Additionally, it was found that even a small amount of supervised data can significantly improve the model’s word recognition accuracy(Liu et al., 2024). As the model is pre-trained on a massive, diverse, multilingual dataset, it provides a robust understanding of phonetics and linguistic patterns that can be generalised for low-resource languages, such as Assamese (de Zuazo, Navas, Saratxaga and Rioja, 2025). The simplified architecture of the Whisper model is shown in Fig. 2. The model’s basic network architecture is a multi-layer stacked Transformer with an encoder-decoder architecture. The model is divided into five versions based on the number of layers, feature dimensions, and attention heads. These versions are named as Tiny , Base , Small , Medium , and Large . Details of each version are presented in the Table 1. There are several compelling reasons for selecting the Whisper `Small' variant for Assamese ASR. 

`Tiny' and the `Base' variants are shallow and are incapable of capturing the dental and alveolar sounds of the Assamese language. In our experiment, we observed that the `Small' variant was prone to overfitting and hallucinations. This led to our decision to avoid `Medium' and `Large' variants, as they tend to memorise the training data, leading to overfitting. Whisper-small offer robust generalisation while it is capable of finetuning on consumer-grade GPUs. The whisper-small variant consists of 12 transformer layers each in its encoder and decoder with a hidden size of 768. There are 12 attention heads in both the encoder and decoder. The number of trainable parameters is approximately 244 million. 

## 4. Dataset and Pre-processing 

The efficacy of ASR depends on both the quality and quantity of the data being used (De Vries, Davel, Badenhorst, Basson, De Wet, Barnard and De Waal, 2014). In the following subsection 4.1, we present details of the dataset used in the study. Preprocessing is performed to feed the data into the Whisper model and to avoid any inconsistency. Details of the preprocessing performed are discussed in subsections 4.2 and 4.2.2. 

4.1. Dataset used 

The experimental data for this study were sourced from the Common Voice Scripted Speech 24.0 - Assamese (Ardila, Branson, Davis, Kohler, Meyer, Henretty, Morais, Saunders, Tyers and Weber, 2020)(Mozilla Foundation, 2026). The Common Voice Corpus 24.0 is a public, multilingual speech dataset released by Mozilla. The dataset contains 4,681 audio clips, totalling 7.66 hours of speech, of which 3 hours have been formally validated by the community. The dataset is contributed by 51 speakers, of whom 52% are in their forties. The gender of the contributors was mostly undefined, with 18% identifying as male. The audio files are in MP3 format, and each is paired with its corresponding text transcription. Along with the validated clips ( validated.tsv ), it also contains clips that have not been validated by the community (other.tsv ). The validated clips were partitioned into official modeling splits: 953 training ( train.tsv ), 485    

> :Preprint submitted to arXiv Page 5 of 30 Figure 2: Whisper model architecture.

development ( dev.tsv ), and 394 test ( test.tsv ) samples. In addition to the official 953 validated training clips ( train.tsv ), the model was trained on 2,567 unique clips from the ‘ other.tsv ’ increasing the training set to 3520 clips. 

4.2. Data Preprocessing 

Data preprocessing is a crucial step in fine-tuning any Acoustic model. Whisper requires both the audio signal and its corresponding transcript as inputs. Therefore, it is essential to normalize these two modalities, and the process of normalization is discussed in the following subsections. 

4.2.1. Audio Signal Normalization 

A crucial pre-processing step involves preparing the audio files to meet the Whisper model’s input requirements. Sampling frequency of the Common Voice audio is 48 kHz. Since most speech processing models, including Whisper, require a sampling rate of 16 kHz, all audio files were resampled to a consistent 16 kHz sampling rate (Singh, Zhong, Wang, Mendes, Hasegawa-Johnson, Abdulla and Shahamiri, 2024). Additionally, stereo sources are converted to a single-channel ( mono ) input. The audio files are then transformed into fixed-size log-mel-spectrogram features, as illustrated in Fig. 3. The Waveform captures the time-domain utterance and is more informative. However, it is computationally expensive as it contains redundancy (Malah, 1979). The first plot is a waveform showing the raw audio amplitude over time. The second plot shows the energy distribution across standard frequency bands, generated by applying the      

> :Preprint submitted to arXiv Page 6 of 30 Figure 3: Pre-processed Audio required by Whisper model for "আমাৰ ঘৰত তলা মৰা অৱস্াত ওছৰেৰ ঘৰত মানু হ নথকা সময়ত চুিৰ ৈহিছল।" .( [amaôg HOôOt tOla mOôa ObOxt Hat usOôOôe g HOôOt manuH nOt HOka xOmOjOt suôi Hoisil] )

Short-Time Fourier Transform (STFT) to a linear-frequency spectrogram. The Mel spectrogram shown in the third plot represents the converted audio signals in perceptually meaningful Mel scale bands that mimics human auditory perception. It helps in reducing dimensionality while preserving the speaker’s perceptual fingerprints. (Lambamo, Srinivasagan and Jifara, 2023). Finally, the log-Mel spectrogram is generated by applying logarithmic transformation on the Mel scale bands that contains the most informative spectral components required by Whisper(Nguyen-Duc, Nguyen, Nguyen-Ho-Nhat, Nguyen and Lee, 2025). Whisper expects audio of a fixed 30-second length. Therefore, the preprocessor pads shorter sentences with silence and truncates longer ones. 

4.2.2. Canonicalization 

In the process of fine-tuning foundation models like Whisper or other ASR models, the quality and consistency of the transcripts are crucial to the model’s performance. Canonicalization is a process of converting multiple equivalent textual forms into a single standard representation, is one of the techniques used to achieve such consistency (Culotta, Wick, Hall, Marzilli and McCallum, 2007). Assamese language contains several conjuncts ( যুক্াক্ৰ , pronounced as [zuk.ta.xO.ôO] ). These conjuncts are formed by combining two or more consonants without an intervening vowel. They can appear in multiple orthographic forms depending on typing or Unicode encoding, making transcript normalization essential. Additionally, crowd-sourced transcripts of the Common Voice dataset may contain mixed scripts from other languages, such as English. Normalization of the transcripts is performed using NFKC (Normalisation Form Compatibility Composition) Unicode normalisation (Davis and Dürst, 2001). NFKC performs aggressive cleaning and standardizes transcripts even for noisy datasets. The advantage of NFKC over other Unicode normalization is that it not only cleans text but also performs orthographic transformations. It defines both canonical and compatibility equivalence to handle complex Assamese scripts. Canonical equivalence concerns a “visual ” match, in which the characters are treated as identical in both appearance and meaning. Characters that have a combination of consonants ‘ ক’ ([k]) and vowel ‘ ি◌ ’ ( [i] ) can be represented as ‘ িক ’ (“ [ki] ”) or ( ক + ি◌ ). NFKC ensures that the Base + mark is collapsed into a single character. Compatibility equivalence addresses “Functional” matches, so that characters that might look different due to formatting, such as ligatures, superscripts or subscripts, and stylised variations (bold/italised) represent the same plain-text character. Although there is similarity between the Assamese scripts and their Bengali counterparts, specific glyphs like [ô] (ৰ) and [wO] (ৱ) are different from Bengali [R O] (র) and [w] (ব). Because of legacy encoding and the availability of Bengali encoding on most mobile devices, many users may substitute these characters with Bengali characters. Unicode does not consider both Assamese and Bengali ‘Ra’ as equivalent because they belong to different languages. To prevent the model from suffering from Vocabulary Fragmentation, Graphemic Standardization was implemented using custom mapping to unify these representations.   

> :Preprint submitted to arXiv Page 7 of 30

4.3. Data Augmentation 

Data augmentation is a common technique to increase the amount of data for training a model(Bhat and Strik, 2025). SpecAugment , Pitch Shifting , and Volume Perturbation are common data augmentation approaches used in ASR. We employed a data-centric approach for augmentation. The Assamese subset of the Common Voice 24.0 dataset includes two usable subsets, viz., validated.tsv and other.tsv subsets(Mozilla Foundation, 2026). The validated subset, validated.tsv includes recordings that have received sufficient positive votes from crowd contributors and therefore represent high-quality speech–text pairs. However, the amount of validated audio (approx. 3 hours) is insufficient for fine-tuning Whisper (Akera, Nafula, Walukagga, Yiga, Quinn and Mwebaze, 2025). Liu et al. (Liu et al., 2024), while fine-tuning Whisper for low-resource African languages, found significant improvements in WER with less than 15 hours of training data. Akera et al. (Akera et al., 2025) conducted a data scaling study, demonstrating that practical performance can be achieved with at least 50 hours of transcribed data, with performance continuing to improve up to 200 hours of training data. Considering these findings, the inclusion of additional samples from other.tsv was explored to increase the overall training data available for fine-tuning. The other.tsv 

subset is comparatively larger, containing nearly three times the validated.tsv set. The other.tsv subset is generally ignored because it lacks crowd-sourced consensus, as only recordings that achieve sufficient positive crowd consensus are included in the validated.tsv set. This could be due to dialectical differences or the presence of background noise. This anomaly can serve as a natural regularisation mechanism for fine-tuning the ASR model. The availability of this additional data ( other.tsv ) enables implementing the data-centric augmentation approach alongside other augmentation techniques, such as SpecAugment . We prepared the training corpus by merging the train subset ( train.tsv ) with other.tsv . Care has been taken to maintain the integrity of the test ( test.tsv ) and validation ( dev.tsv ) sets, removing them from the merged data so that the model does not accidentally train on these data. 

## 5. Evaluation Metrics Used 

Different evaluation metrics are available to measure the efficiency of an ASR Model. The primary metrics used in this study are, viz., Word Error Rate ( WER ), Character Error Rate ( CER ), Match Error Rate (MER ), BLEU Score (Bilingual Evaluation Understudy), METEOR (Metric for Evaluation of Translation with Explicit ORdering), Word Information Lost ( WIL ), Precision , Recall , F1-score , Real-Time Factor (RTF ). These metrics are discussed in this section. 

5.1. Word Error Rate (WER) 

Word Error Rate (WER) is a widely adopted evaluation metric that measures the accuracy of a predicted transcript relative to a ground-truth reference (Morris, Maier and Green, 2004). WER is computed as 

𝑊 𝐸𝑅 = Σ( , , )

 , (1) where , , and  correspond to substitution, deletion, and insertion errors, respectively, and 𝑁 denotes the total number of words in the reference transcription. Substitution errors occur when an incorrect word replaces a reference word, deletion errors arise when a reference word is omitted, and insertion errors correspond to additional words that do not appear in the reference transcription. A lower WER indicates better recognition performance. Metrics like Word Recognition Rate (WRR) can be computed from WER as 𝑊 𝑅𝑅 = 1 * 𝑊 𝐸𝑅 .

5.2. Character Error Rate (CER) 

The Character Error Rate (CER) is another commonly used evaluation metric for assessing the accuracy of an ASR system. It provides a fine-grained evaluation of transcription quality by measuring character-level recognition errors rather than word-level errors(Morris et al., 2004). 

𝐶𝐸𝑅 = Σ( , , )

 (2) Where ,, , and  are the total number of substitutions, deletions, insertions, and correct words, respectively.  = Σ( , , ) is the total number of characters in the reference transcript. CER is useful for   

> :Preprint submitted to arXiv Page 8 of 30

languages with agglutinative morphology and complex word boundaries. Both metrics provide a quantitative assessment of the model’s transcription accuracy. 

5.3. Match Error Rate (MER) 

Match Error Rate ( 𝑀𝐸𝑅 ) measures the word-level errors relative to the total number of aligned words between the reference and predicted transcripts(Morris et al., 2004). 

𝑀𝐸𝑅 = Σ( , , )Σ( , , , ) (3) where  denotes the number of correctly recognized words,  represents the number of substitutions, 

denotes the number of deletions, and  denotes the number of insertions in the predicted transcription. 

5.4. Word Information Lost (WIL) 

The Word Information Lost (WIL) metric measures numerically how much word-level information is lost between the reference and the predicted transcription by counting the substitutions, deletions, and insertions of the words, providing a more information-theoretic assessment than the simple Word Error Rate (WER)(Morris et al., 2004). Mathematically, WIL is defined as WIL = 1 *  ⋅ 

Σ( , , ) (4) where  is the number of correctly recognized words,  the number of word substitutions,  is number of word insertions, and  is the total number of words in the reference. A Lower WIL value indicates better predicted transcription accuracy. WIL combines correctness relative to both the reference and predicted transcripts. 

5.5. BLEU Score (Bilingual Evaluation Understudy) 

The BLEU Score is a corpus-based automatic evaluation measure widely used for machine translation, Automatic Speech Recognition (ASR) (Papineni, Roukos, Ward and Zhu, 2002). The BLEU score is language independent and closely resembles human judgment. It analyze the similarity between a generated hypothesis and the reference texts using modified n-gram precision (𝑃 𝑛 ), while penalizing excessively short predicted candidate sentences through a brevity penalty . Higher BLEU scores indicate stronger correspondence to the reference transcript. Calculation of modified n-gram precision (𝑃 𝑛 ), brevity penalty , and Overall BLUE score is given below. 

Modified n-gram precision( 𝑃 𝑛 ): Modified n-gram precision value ( 𝑃 𝑛 ) is the measure of the proportion of n-grams in a candidate sentence that correctly appear in one or more reference sentences. In standard n-gram precision, every occurrence of an n-gram in the candidate is counted, even if it appears more times than in the reference, while in the modified n-gram precision, the count of each n-gram in the candidate is clipped to the maximum number of times it appears in the reference. This ensures no of n-gram computation. 

𝑃 𝑛 is calculated using the following formula 

𝑃 𝑛 =

∑𝑔 Ë𝐶 min 

(

Count 𝐶 (𝑔 ), Count 𝑅 (𝑔 )

)∑𝑔 Ë𝐶 Count 𝐶 (𝑔 ) (5) where, 𝐶 represents candidate sentence, 𝑅 denotes reference sentence(s), 𝑔 is the n-gram of length 𝑛 ,Count 𝐶 (𝑔 ) represents the frequency of n-gram 𝑔 in the candidate, and Count 𝑅 (𝑔 ) denotes the frequency of n-gram 𝑔 in the reference. The expression, min 

(

Count 𝐶 (𝑔 ), Count 𝑅 (𝑔 )

)

ensures that no n-gram is over-counted. 

Brevity penalty (BP): Brevity penalty (BP) is calculated to prevent artificially high precision cores excessively caused by shorter predictions than the reference, which could be achieved by omitting the words   

> :Preprint submitted to arXiv Page 9 of 30

present in the reference but missing in the candidate. The mathematical expression for 𝐵𝑃 is 

𝐵𝑃 =

{1 if 𝑐 > 𝑟 

exp (1 * 𝑟 /𝑐 ) if 𝑐 ≤ 𝑟 (6) where 𝑐 and 𝑟 are the lengths of the candidate and reference, respectively. 

Overall BLEU score: Finally, the overall BLEU score is calculated that combines multiple n-gram precisions using a geometric mean, scaling by the Brevity penalty using the following mathematical formula: BLEU = 𝐵𝑃 ⋅ exp 

( 𝑁 ∑

> 𝑛 =1

𝑤 𝑛 log 𝑃 𝑛 

)

(7) where 𝑁 is the maximum n-gram order (commonly 4) and 𝑤 𝑛 are the weighting coefficients, typically uniform ( 𝑤 𝑛 = 1/ 𝑁 ). This formulation ensures that BLEU evaluates both lexical overlap and fluency at the n-gram level, while discouraging artificially short candidate outputs. 

5.6. METEOR (Metric for Evaluation of Translation with Explicit ORdering) 

METEOR is more flexible than BLEU, offering matching techniques such as exact, stem, synonym, and paraphrase matches. METEOR is frequently regarded as a more accurate reflection of human quality assessment(Banerjee and Lavie, 2005). METEOR computes unigram precision (P) and recall (R) by counting the number of correctly matched words in the reference and predicted transcriptions. Based on the precision (𝑃 ) and recall ( 𝑅 ), a weighted harmonic mean, 𝔽 𝑚𝑒𝑎𝑛 is computed(Labied, Belangour and Banane, 2024; Magalhães et al., 2022). 

𝔽 𝑚𝑒𝑎𝑛 = 10 𝑃 𝑅 𝑅 + 9 𝑃 (8) METEOR introduces a fragmented penalty factor 𝑀 𝑝𝑒𝑛𝑎𝑙𝑡𝑦 , which is used to reduce the METEOR score even when the matched words between the reference and predicted are scattered, i.e., they appear in fragmented segments rather than a continuous sequence. 

𝑀 𝑝𝑒𝑛𝑎𝑙𝑡𝑦 = 𝛼 

( 𝑐ℎ 𝑚 𝑛 

)𝛽 

(9) Where, 𝑐ℎ reperent the number of chunks (continuous matched sequences), 𝑚 𝑛 denotes the number of matched unigrams, 𝛼 denotes the penalty parameter, and 𝛽 denotes the fragmentation parameter. The final METEOR score is calculated by multiplying 𝔽 𝑚𝑒𝑎𝑛 by a penalty factor, 𝑀 𝑝𝑒𝑛𝑎𝑙𝑡𝑦 . The mathematical expression for the final METEOR calculation is as follows 

𝑀 𝑓 𝑖𝑛𝑎𝑙 = 𝔽 𝑚𝑒𝑎𝑛 ￿ (1 * 𝑀 𝑝𝑒𝑛𝑎𝑙𝑡𝑦 ) (10) 

5.7. Precision 

In machine learning, Precision metric evaluates the proportion of true positive predictions out of all positive predictions made by a given model. In case of ASR, True positive predictions correspond to the correctly recognized words in the predicted transcripts with respect to the total number of words generated by the predicted transcripts(Kapusta, Držík, Šteflovič and Nagy, 2024). Mathematically, precision is defined as 

𝑃 𝑟𝑒𝑐𝑖𝑠𝑖𝑜𝑛 = 𝑇 𝑃 𝑇 𝑃 + 𝐹 𝑃 =  +  (11) Where, 𝑇 𝑃 (True Positives) represent correctly predicted words( ), and 𝐹 𝑃 (False Positives) represent incorrectly predicted tokens that do not exist (i.e. Insertion, ) in the reference transcript. A higher precision value of an ASR indicates fewer incorrect insertions in the predicted transcripts.   

> :Preprint submitted to arXiv Page 10 of 30

5.8. Recall 

Recall of an ASR model measures the proportion of words in the reference transcripts that are correctly recognized in the predicted is transcript(Morris et al., 2004). Mathematically, Recall is defined as 

𝑅𝑒𝑐𝑎𝑙𝑙 = 𝑇 𝑃 𝑇 𝑃 + 𝐹 𝑁 =  +  (12) Where, 𝑇 𝑃 (True Positives) denotes the correctly predicted words ( ), and 𝐹 𝑁 (False Negatives) denotes the number of words in the reference transcript that were missed (i.e. deletion, ) by the ASR model. 

5.9. F1-score 

In ASR evaluation, the F1-score measures the balance between the accuracy of predicted words and the coverage of reference words. It is defined as the harmonic mean of Precision and Recall(Morris et al., 2004; El Hannani, Errattahi, Salmam, Hain and Ouahmane, 2021): 

F1-score = 2 ⋅ Precision ⋅ Recall Precision + Recall 

= 2 𝑇 𝑃 

2 𝑇 𝑃 + 𝐹 𝑃 + 𝐹 𝑁 

= 2 

2  +  + 

(13) 

F1-score helps to evaluate overall word-level accuracy. 

5.10. Hallucination Error Rate(HER) 

In Automatic Speech Recognition (ASR), hallucination occurs when the system produces tokens that do not exist in the audio signal. Hence, the Hallucination Error Rate (HER) quantifies how often a model generates output that is not supported by the input Let the reference transcript be defined as REF = ( 𝑟 1, 𝑟 2, § , 𝑟 𝑛 ), 1 ≤ 𝑛 ≤  

where  = |REF | denotes the number of tokens in the reference transcript. Let the corresponding predicted transcript of above 𝑅𝐸𝐹 generated by the ASR system be PRED = ( 𝑝 1, 𝑝 2, § , 𝑝 𝑚 ), 1 ≤ 𝑚 ≤  

where  = |PRED | represents the number of predicted tokens. An alignment function  maps each predicted token to either a corresponding reference token or to É, if no valid alignment exists, and it can be defined as follows 

 : ^1, § , ‘ → ^1, § , 𝑁 ‘ ä ^É‘ The alignment,  is typically obtained using minimum edit distance i.e. Levenshtein alignment .The set of hallucinated tokens is defined as 

 = ^ 𝑝 𝑖 Ë PRED |(𝑖 ) = É ‘ , 1 ≤ 𝑖 ≤  

Where, (𝑖 ) = É, represents 𝑖 -th tokens in the prediction that do not align with any token in the reference transcript. The Hallucination Error Rate ( 𝐻𝐸𝑅 𝑟𝑒𝑓 ) normalized with respect to the reference transcript is therefore given by the following equation   

> :Preprint submitted to arXiv Page 11 of 30

𝐻𝐸𝑅 𝑟𝑒𝑓 = |||REF | =

|||^ 𝑝 𝑖 Ë PRED : (𝑖 ) = É‘ |||

 . (14) However, normalizing hallucinations with respect to the reference length may inflate the hallucination estimation, particularly when the model generates longer transcripts than the reference transcript. To mitigate this bias, 𝐻𝐸𝑅 𝑝𝑟𝑒𝑑 can alternatively be defined relative to the predicted transcript length as 

𝐻𝐸𝑅 𝑝𝑟𝑒𝑑 = |||PRED | =

|||^ 𝑝 𝑖 Ë PRED : (𝑖 ) = É‘ |||

 . (15) 

5.11. Real-Time Factor (RTF) 

Real-Time Factor ( RTF ) is a metric used to evaluate the computational efficiency of an ASR system. It is defined as the ratio of the total processing time, 𝑇 𝑝 , taken by the ASR system to process an input audio signal to the duration, 𝑇 𝑑 , of the audio itself. 

RTF = 𝑇 𝑝 

𝑇 𝑑 

(16) An RTF ≤ 1 indicates that the ASR system can process speech faster than real time, whereas RTF > 1

indicates slower processing than real time. 

## 6. Methodology 

This research aims to develop a robust ASR for the low-resource Assamese language. The process begins with selecting the appropriate foundation model. Our methodology for fine-tuning Wishper is organized in four distinct stages, viz., Zero-Shot Evaluation , Controlled Fine-tuning approach , Optimization 

and Decoding Strategy . Zero-shot evaluation is performed to establish a benchmark, followed by controlled fine-tuning to mitigate hallucinations. To maximize the model’s performance on Assamese speech recognition, we implemented a robust optimization framework alongside specialized decoding strategies during the fine-tuning and inference stages. Details of all these stages are discussed in the following sections. 

6.1. Zero-Shot Evaluation 

Zero-shot evaluation involves assessing a machine learning model on an unfamiliar task, dataset, or language without any targeted training or fine-tuning. Zero-Shot evaluation of the Whisper-small model was performed by testing the multilingual pre-trained model on Assamese speech data ( test.tsv ) without task-specific fine-tuning. This was conducted to evaluate how well Whisper generalizes to Assamese. Additionally, an evaluation was also conducted to establish a benchmark for assessing the fine-tuned model’s performance. Let 𝜃 denote the transformer-based Whisper-small model parameterized by 𝜃 . The model is pre-trained on a massive, heterogeneous dataset 𝑡𝑟𝑎𝑖𝑛 , so that it assigns high probability to the correct sequence of words 𝑌 = ^𝑦 1, 𝑦 2, § , 𝑦 𝑛 ‘ conditioned on the acoustic feature set 𝑋 

(𝜃 ) = *𝔼 (𝑋,𝑌 )í𝑡𝑟𝑎𝑖𝑛 

⦅ 𝑛 ∑

> 𝑖 =1

log 𝑃 (𝑦 𝑖 Ý 𝑦 <𝑖 , 𝑋 ; 𝜃 )

⦆

(17) where, 

(𝜃 ) is the Loss function, 𝔼 (𝑋,𝑌 )í𝑡𝑟𝑎𝑖𝑛 is the expectation operator across the entire pre-training dataset 

𝑡𝑟𝑎𝑖𝑛 , 𝑦 <𝑖 = ^𝑦 1, 𝑦 2, § , 𝑦 (𝑖 *1) ‘ is the sequence of previous tokens, and 𝑃 (𝑦 𝑖 Ý 𝑦 <𝑖 , 𝑋 ; 𝜃 ) is probability that the model 𝜃 assigns to the correct token 𝑦 𝑖 for input audio 𝑋 for parameters 𝜃 

The zero-shot evaluation is performed using a target domain 𝑡𝑎𝑟𝑔𝑒𝑡 (test.tsv from Common Voice 24.0 Assamese speech), under the assumption of data isolation where 𝑡𝑎𝑟𝑔𝑒𝑡 ã 𝑡𝑟𝑎𝑖𝑛 = É. The model generates the most probable sequence ˆ𝑌 via beam search while the parameter set 𝜃 remains unchanged.    

> :Preprint submitted to arXiv Page 12 of 30 Figure 4: Zero-shot, Fine-tuning, and Testing Methodology.

ˆ𝑌 = arg max  

> 𝑌 Ë<
> 𝑛

∏

> 𝑖 =1

𝑃 (𝑦 𝑖 Ý 𝑦 <𝑖 , 𝑋 ; 𝜃 ) (18) The discrepancy between the predicted sequence ˆ𝑌 and the ground-truth 𝑌 𝑟𝑒𝑓 Ë 𝑡𝑎𝑟𝑔𝑒𝑡 is quantified using the WER, CER, MER, BLEU Score, METEOR, WIL, Precision, Recall, F1-score, HER and RTF. 

6.2. Controlled Fine-Tuning 

Controlled Fine-tuning of the Whisper model was performed using the Hugging Face Transformers library version 5.2.0, running on Python version 3.12.12. This library provides a Trainer class designed for efficient model training. Fine-tuning the pre-trained Whisper model was performed to adapt it to the unique lexical and phonetic characteristics of the Assamese language. The controlled fine-tuning and inference pipeline used in this study is illustrated in Figure 4. The process begins with audio normalization and canonicalization of the transcripts, ensuring consistent and standardized input for the Whisper Trainer. The fine-tuned Whisper model is then used to generate transcripts for the audio in the test.tsv file. The predicted transcripts are then compared against the reference transcripts to evaluate performance using Word Error Rate (WER) and Character Error Rate (CER), Match Error Rate (MER), Word Information Lost (WIL), BLEU Score (Bilingual Evaluation Understudy), METEOR, Precision, Recall, F1-score, Hallucination Error Rate(HER), and Real-Time Factor (RTF). The results provide the quantitative measures of transcription accuracy of the fine-tuned model performance at both the word and character levels. In standard fine-tuning, the dataset is typically assumed to contain perfect ground truth annotations. However, it is observed that the available validated data in Assamese language is not sufficient. To encounter this limitation, we incorporated the lower-consensus audio data ( other.tsv ) subset alongside the validated set during fine-tuning. These data may contain acoustic noise. Hence, specific measures through Unicode NFKC normalization is required to sanitise the transcripts preventing the model from learning noise patterns instead of phonetic characteristics. Incorporation of other.tsv introduced acoustic variations, but special care had to be taken to ensure that any non-Assamese character inclusion is normalised. All punctuations were also removed, to allow the model to concentrate on exclusively learning the phonetics, rather than wasting the time of learning grammatical pauses. Fine-tuning of the model on insufficient Assamese data   

> :Preprint submitted to arXiv Page 13 of 30

may led to overfitting. This requires regularizing the model by applying a linear learning rate warmup (LRW) and weight decay. The fine-tuning process is further supported by a high-consensus validation set, dev.tsv ,which guided model optimisation and early stopping. 

6.3. Model Optimization 

As Whisper-small is pre-trained on large-scale multilingual speech data containing 244 million pa-rameters, an efficient and scalable deployment of the model requires certain optimizations to reduce computational load while maintaining transcription accuracy and robustness. Both hardware-level and model-level optimizations were performed to improve resource utilization while maintaining the model’s robustness. These optimizations are discussed in the following sections. 

6.3.1. Hardware-Level Optimization 

Experiments were conducted in a Kaggle T4 GPU environment with a VRAM limit of 16GB. This available GPU memory presents a constraint when fine-tuning large models like Whisper. Because of this constraint, several hardware-related optimization techniques were employed. We kept the training batch size at 2 with 4 Gradient Accumulation Steps. This allowed the model to effectively learn from 8 samples before updating its weights. The Whisper-small variant with 244M parameters often encountered an “Out of Memory” error with larger batch sizes. Standard fine-tuning uses 32-bit floats (FP32), but due to VRAM constraints, we employed mixed-precision with 16-bit floats (FP16). 

6.3.2. Model-level Optimizations 

The model-level optimization was performed using linear learning rate warmup (LRW) and Weight decay. LRW gradually increases the learning rate from a small value to the target learning rate during the warmup steps of training (Goyal, Dollár, Girshick, Noordhuis, Wesolowski, Kyrola, Tulloch, Jia and He, 2017). Given the targeted learning rate 𝜂 , learning rate 𝜂 𝑡 , at any given step 𝑡 is a fraction of the targeted learning rate, calculated as 

𝜂 𝑡 = 𝜂 ￿ 𝑡 𝑡 𝑤 

, 𝑡 ≤ 𝑡 𝑤 (19) where 𝑡 𝑤 is the total number of steps in the warmup phase. A linear learning rate warm-up was employed for the initial 50 steps. This helped in the gradual increase in the learning rate before reaching its peak at 

1 ￿ 10 −5. This scheduling strategy facilitates the acquisition of initial statistics to support reliable updates. Furthermore, LRW also helped in preserving the multilingual knowledge acquired during pre-training, as it is exposed to a new target language. As the Zero-shot evaluation revealed, the model had limited exposure to Assamese during pre-training, which could cause its gradients to be unstable at first when it encounters Assamese speech. LRW also controlled this volatility. To facilitate stable convergence, the optimization process was governed by a cosine annealing learning rate scheduler that gradually decreases the learning rate to near zero as training progresses. 

𝜂 𝑡 = 𝜂 𝑚𝑖𝑛 + 12 (𝜂 𝑚𝑎𝑥 * 𝜂 𝑚𝑖𝑛 )

(

1 + cos 

( 𝑡 𝑇 𝑚𝑎𝑥 

𝜋 

)) 

(20) where, 𝑇 𝑚𝑎𝑥 represents the total number of training steps and 𝜂 𝑚𝑖𝑛 is the terminal learning rate. Weight decay introduced by Hanson and Pratt (Hanson and Pratt, 1988) is a regularization technique that adds a penalty to the loss function based on the size of the weights. It is equivalent to the L2 regularization, where penalty is added to (𝜃 ),

total (𝜃 ) = (𝜃 ) + 𝜆 

2 || 𝜃 || 22 (21) where 𝜃 is a vector containing all weights ( w) and biases ( b), 𝜆 is the Weight Decay Coefficient, and 

|| 𝜃 || 22 denotes the squared L2 norm calculated as || 𝜃 || 22 = ∑𝑛 𝑗 =1 𝜃 2 

> 𝑗

. At each training step 𝑡 , the weights 𝜃 are                   

> :Preprint submitted to arXiv Page 14 of 30 Table 2
> Hyperparameters used in fine-tuning
> Category Hyperparameter Value
> Optimization Learning Rate 1￿10 *5
> Warmup Steps 50 Optimizer AdamW Efficiency Precision FP16 Grad. Accumulation 4Grad. Checkpointing Enabled Regularization Weight Decay 0.05 Dropout Rate 0.05 Early Stopping 2 (patience) Training Flow Max Steps 3000 Evaluation Freq. 500 Steps

updated as follows 

𝜃 𝑡 +1 = (1 * 𝜂𝜆 )𝜃 𝑡 * 𝜂 (𝐿 (𝜃 𝑡 ) (22) To mitigate model overfitting, we used a weight decay of 0.05 in our approach. With 244M parameters, the model is prone to memorization with merely a few thousand training samples. A large weight decay of 0.05 adds a penalty to the loss function based on the magnitude of the weights, forcing the model to find the simplest mathematical path to the correct transcription. The default AdamW (Adaptive Moment Estimation with Decoupled Weight Decay) optimizer was employed to update the model parameters (Loshchilov and Hutter, 2019). AdamW is based on Adam, which decouples the weight decay regularization from the gradient update step. The steps of adaptive gradient and the decoupled weight decay used in AdamW are presented in Equation 23. 

𝜃 𝑡 +1 = 𝜃 𝑡 * 𝜂 ˆ𝑚 𝑡 

√ˆ𝑣 𝑡 + 𝜖 ⏟⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏟⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏞⏟ 

> Adaptive Gradient Update

* 𝜂𝜆𝜃 𝑡 

⏟⏟⏟

> Decoupled Weight Decay

(23) where 𝜃 is a weight vector 𝜂 is the Learning Rate, 𝜆 is the Weight Decay coefficient, ˆ𝑚 𝑡 is the momentum, ˆ𝑣 𝑡 

is the uncentered variance and 𝜖 is a small constant to prevent division by zero. AdamW applies weight decay directly to the parameters rather than through the gradient-based moments. Use of AdamW enables precise, parameter-specific updates for the Assamese phonemes, which contain several conjuncts. We incorporated a light dropout rate of 0.05 into the transformer attention and fully connected layers to enhance the model’s robustness. Stochastically deactivating a subset of neurons prevented the development of dependencies between units. The value of 0.05 was strategically selected to preserve the pre-trained knowledge while mitigating the architectural redundancy. The model’s performance was evaluated every 500 steps against the validation set. Early Stopping with a patience of 2 (two) evaluation cycles (1000 steps) terminates fine-tuning when validation loss stops improving, even if the training loss continues to decrease. The hyperparameters configured for the training session are presented in Table 2. 

6.4. Decoding Strategy 

In the Decoder block of Whisper, the determination of the next Assamese character depends on the search strategy employed. There is a trade-off between speed and linguistic farsightedness while deciding on the search strategy. A greedy search at each timestamp decides the next token by selecting the one with the highest absolute probability, ignoring remaining tokens. This search strategy is simple and fast, but may not be sufficient in handling agglutinative languages like Assamese. To mitigate this problem, the Beam Search (Lowerre, 1990; Greer, Lowerre and Wilcox, 1982) approach is chosen with a beam width of 5. In contrast   

> :Preprint submitted to arXiv Page 15 of 30

to greedy search, beam search tracks the 5 most likely sequences concurrently. Subsequently, the cumulative probabilities of these 25 paths are calculated, and the top 5 are maintained. Thus, the Beam search acts as a probabilistic filter to reduce hallucinations. 

## 7. Experimental Results 

Experimental evaluation of controlled fine-tuning of Whisper-small demonstrates a transformative shift in performance from a hallucinating pre-trained multilingual model to a robust ASR. The experimental results of the fine-tuned Whisper-small model, both quantitative and qualitative, are discussed in the following sections. 

7.1. Quantitative Analysis 

Quantitative analysis of an ASR model involves measuring model performance using numerical metrics, such as Word Error Rate (WER) and Character Error Rate (CER), providing an objective evaluation of overall transcription accuracy. The Fine-tuning log of the Whisper model provides important information about its behaviour during the tuning phase. These logs are analyzed in the following section. A comparison of the model is also presented before and after fine-tuning in the subsequent section. Finally, the reasons for difference in the evaluation metrics are also investigated. 

7.1.1. Zero-shot Evaluation Results (Baseline) 

In our study, zero-shot evaluation provides a benchmark demonstrating that Whisper-small lacks the ability to correctly transcribe Assamese. For the zero-shot evaluation, the pre-trained Whisper-small model was tested using the test data of the Common Voice 24.0 Assamese subset. The findings indicate poor transcription performance in the zero-shot condition, evidenced by a high Word Error Rate (WER) of 2.0127 and a Character Error Rate (CER) of 1.9091, suggesting significant discrepancies between the predicted and actual transcriptions. Likewise, the Match Error Rate (MER) and Word Information Lost (WIL) reached 1.0000, indicating a serious decline in both recognition accuracy and linguistic alignment. Additionally, text quality measures reinforce this shortcoming, with both BLEU and METEOR scores recorded at 0.00, highlighting the model’s failure to produce outputs that are either semantically or structurally coherent in the unfamiliar domain. The Precision, Recall, and F1 scores remained zero, indicating that accurate token-level predictions were very limited. Additionally, the hallucination analysis revealed high values, with HER 𝑟𝑒𝑓 at 1.0127 and HER 𝑝𝑟𝑒𝑑 at 0.5552, which suggests frequent occurrence of generating unsupported or misleading tokens. InDespite these performance challenges, the real-time factor (RTF) of 0.2943 indicates a swift inference speed, demonstrating that computational efficiency is maintainedven as recognition performance declines. On further examination of some random samples, it is found that the model encountered a language it did not know well, producing repetitive punctuation (, , , …) or single characters (d d d d d …) in some predicted transcripts. In other predicted transcripts, it identified the word phonetically but represented the transcripts in Hindi, Arabic, and some in English. The process of producing such kind of output is termed as hallucination (Ji et al., 2023). To be more specific, the model is suffering from cross-lingual hallucination. Examples of some of these transcripts produced by Whisper-small are presented in Table 3. Zero-shot with Whisper-medium also produced similar results. The knowledge transfer gap is clearly visible from the results. A worst-case scenario of hallucination is also seen. Overall, the zero-shot results establish a challenging baseline and emphasize the necessity of domain-specific fine-tuning to achieve reliable transcription performance in low-resource or previously unseen linguistic settings. 

7.1.2. Fine-tuning Results 

This section presents the quantitative results of the fine-tuning experiments. The fine-tuning logs presented in Table 4 demonstrate a robust numerical stability and efficient convergence over 13.64 epochs. Rapid improvement occurs in the initial steps (Steps 0 to 500) as training loss improves from 27.0038 to 2.4599 demonstrating that the model is adapting to phonetic of Assamese language. This assertion is additionally backed by the stability of the gradient norm, which, following an initial adaptation peak of 44.7003, stabilized within a consistent range of 4.0 to 8.0 for the duration of the session, signifying that neither vanishing nor exploding gradient issues were present. The use of a cosine learning rate scheduler was crucial. By reducing the learning rate from an initial value of 1.0×10−5 to a final value of 2.84×10−12,   

> :Preprint submitted to arXiv Page 16 of 30

Table 3 

Zero-shot Prediction Samples of Whisper-small 

Sample ID Reference and Prediction 

Sample 5 REF: েকাৱা হয় েসই পীঠৰ মিন্ৰ সবব্র্পর্ থম িনমর্ াণ কিৰিছল নৰকাসুেৰ 

PRED: ḍ￿ ￿￿￿￿￿￿￿￿￿￿￿￿￿￿￿￿￿￿￿￿￿￿￿￿￿￿￿￿￿￿￿￿￿￿￿￿￿￿￿￿￿￿￿￿￿￿￿￿￿￿￿￿￿￿￿￿￿￿￿￿￿￿￿￿￿￿￿￿￿￿￿￿￿￿￿￿￿￿￿￿￿￿￿￿￿￿￿￿￿￿￿￿￿￿￿￿￿￿￿￿￿￿￿￿￿￿￿￿￿￿￿￿￿￿￿￿￿￿￿￿￿￿￿￿￿￿￿￿￿￿￿￿￿￿￿￿￿￿￿￿￿￿￿￿￿￿Sample 12 REF: কন্া েদিখ মাকৰ েকালাত েহিৰ উিঠলৈগ 

PRED: खंदा देखी माकखर्ला देडी उितल कोइर् 

Sample 41 REF: এবছৰ আেগেয় কানাডাৈল পলাই ৈগিছল 

PRED: आबश्व र अगे एक खनादाल। पोलाये गुइिसल 

Sample 52 REF: এবছৰ আেগেয় কানাডাৈল পলাই ৈগিছল 

PRED: आबश्व र अगे एक खनादाल। पोलाये गुइिसल 

Sample 57 REF: ঘৰৰ গৃিহণীৰ ওপৰেত েগােটই পিৰয়ালৰ সুখ দুখ িনভর্ৰ কেৰ 

PRED: unknown repeated character Sample 71 REF: মণ্লৰ ঘৰৰ পৰা খবৰ আিহল দৰা এিতয়াও ভাল েহাৱা নাই 

PRED: món dolor kóror bóra kóbor ahi, dorá iti áo pál ho anái. Sample 75 REF: িস চােগ েতামাৰ কথাশ‌ু না নাই আগেত 

PRED: इसागे तुमार कोटा खुनाना यागोते 

Sample 114 REF: আগেত বন্বস্ ৈহিছল আেপানােলাকৰ ফালৰ মদন মণ্লৰ ভােয়কৰ লগত 

PRED: अगो ते बन्दबश्त हो िशल आपना लुकर फलर मदन मन्दलर भायागर दगत 

Sample 140 REF: কাণ্কাৰখানা েদিখ লিভতা আৰু লগৰ েছাৱালী েকজনী িনজৰ ঘৰৰ দু ৱাৰমুখত থুপ খােলৈগ 

PRED: तो तो तो तो तो तो तो तो तो तो तो तो तो §

Sample 182 REF: লিভতাহঁেত উেত্িজত ৈহ বািহৰৰ ফােল চাবৈল ধেৰ 

PRED: लिवता हाते उटे िजतो है बािहर अफार्ले सबले रहारे 

Sample 276 REF: িবেশষৈকশর্ মান অভয় দু ৱৰা আৰুশর্ মান তৰুণ দু ৱৰাৰ বােবইেহ 

PRED: ḍḍḍḍḍḍḍḍḍḍḍḍḍḍ §

Sample 327 REF: েকাৰআনশব্ ৰীফ ইছলাম ধমর্ ৰ মূল ধমর্গর্ন্ 

PRED: तगुराम् सुिरप इस्लाम्द्रमार मुल्द्रमागान्ता 

Sample 345 REF: মানুহেটােৱ কেল ভালৈক িশক িনিশিকিব 

PRED: मनु ट्ट्ट्ट्ट्ट्ट्ट्ट्ट्ट्ट्ट्ट्ट्ट्ट्ट्ट्ट्ट्ट्ट्ट्ट्ट 

Sample 377 REF: তহঁতৰ েনা খায় েকােন 

PRED: तो हतर तो खाय कुने 

Sample 379 REF: মাষ্াৰ গেলই হয় 

PRED: वाँदादादादादादादादादादादादादादादा §

the optimizer enabled high-precision weight updates during the last 500 steps. Figure 5 plots the results of Training with respect to Validation Loss. The plot shows rapid improvement in training loss over the initial 500–1,000 steps. This suggests that the model is successfully identifying primary patterns available in the data. Both training and validation loss flatten out towards the end of training. The validation loss reached its lowest value at 2500 steps. This indicates that the model has reached its ideal checkpoint, and training beyond this may lead to overfitting. The fine-tuning process was monitored using the training and validation loss every 500 steps, along with Word Error Rate (WER), Character Error Rate (CER), Match Error Rate (MER), BLEU Score, METEOR, Word Information Lost (WIL), Precision, Recall, F1-score, and Hallucination Error Rate (HER) on dev.tsv .The Whisper-small model was trained for 3000 steps, and the finetuning result is presented in Table 5 and Table 6. Improvements in transcription accuracy metrics, such as Word Error Rate (WER), Character Error Rate (CER), Match Error Rate (MER), and Word Information loss (WIL), shown in Figure 6a, indicate that 

: Preprint submitted to arXiv Page 17 of 30 Table 4 

Detailed Training Dynamics for Assamese Whisper-Small (50-Step Intervals) 

Step Epoch Loss LR Grad Norm Step Epoch Loss LR Grad Norm 

50 0.23 27.0038 9.80e-06 44.7003 1550 7.05 1.1568 4.87e-06 5.7797 100 0.45 14.0926 9.99e-06 14.5839 1600 7.27 1.1199 4.61e-06 6.0256 150 0.68 11.3490 9.97e-06 18.1376 1650 7.50 1.0786 4.34e-06 6.0215 200 0.91 7.1386 9.94e-06 12.6372 1700 7.73 1.0743 4.08e-06 3.9191 250 1.14 4.9196 9.89e-06 27.2561 1750 7.95 1.0402 3.82e-06 5.1331 300 1.36 3.8298 9.83e-06 9.7788 1800 8.18 1.0335 3.56e-06 5.9659 350 1.59 3.2151 9.75e-06 8.5522 1850 8.41 1.0176 3.31e-06 4.8855 400 1.82 2.9837 9.66e-06 10.3900 1900 8.64 1.0040 3.06e-06 6.7031 450 2.05 2.6180 9.56e-06 8.5074 1950 8.86 0.9853 2.82e-06 4.8910 500 2.27 2.4599 9.44e-06 8.6658 2000 9.09 0.9740 2.58e-06 5.0295 550 2.50 2.3431 9.31e-06 7.5885 2050 9.32 0.9655 2.35e-06 5.1714 600 2.73 2.1793 9.17e-06 10.1753 2100 9.55 0.9125 2.13e-06 6.9887 650 2.95 2.0604 9.02e-06 7.8356 2150 9.77 0.9427 1.92e-06 6.6085 700 3.18 1.8575 8.85e-06 8.0096 2200 10.00 0.9268 1.71e-06 5.0360 750 3.41 1.8505 8.68e-06 5.3001 2250 10.23 0.9361 1.52e-06 4.1370 800 3.64 1.8410 8.49e-06 5.9688 2300 10.45 0.8605 1.33e-06 4.7752 850 3.86 1.8160 8.30e-06 6.9867 2350 10.68 0.8712 1.15e-06 4.4659 900 4.09 1.6903 8.09e-06 5.5991 2400 10.91 0.8788 9.90e-07 5.4036 950 4.32 1.5327 7.88e-06 6.4959 2450 11.14 0.9359 8.36e-07 5.6846 1000 4.55 1.5357 7.66e-06 6.0020 2500 11.36 0.8731 6.95e-07 4.3694 1050 4.77 1.5454 7.43e-06 4.7014 2550 11.59 0.8970 5.66e-07 5.6891 1100 5.00 1.5144 7.19e-06 6.0267 2600 11.82 0.8393 4.49e-07 4.1134 1150 5.23 1.3294 6.95e-06 6.1790 2650 12.05 0.8892 3.45e-07 6.2324 1200 5.45 1.3127 6.70e-06 5.9978 2700 12.27 0.8398 2.55e-07 4.7803 1250 5.68 1.3543 6.45e-06 7.0716 2750 12.50 0.7992 1.78e-07 4.5038 1300 5.91 1.3869 6.19e-06 5.9283 2800 12.73 0.8765 1.14e-07 5.0079 1350 6.14 1.2396 5.93e-06 4.8495 2850 12.95 0.8691 6.45e-08 3.7412 1400 6.36 1.1833 5.67e-06 4.9130 2900 13.18 0.8594 2.89e-08 4.8757 1450 6.59 1.2549 5.40e-06 5.0567 2950 13.41 0.8687 7.37e-09 5.2627 1500 6.82 1.1917 5.14e-06 4.6896 3000 13.64 0.8440 2.84e-12 4.3517 

Table 5 

Similarity, accuracy, and structural metrics for fine-tuned Whisper-Small. 

Step Epoch Validation Loss WER CER MER WIL 

500 2.27 0.2473 0.6084 0.1785 0.5782 0.7555 1000 4.55 0.1951 0.5129 0.1439 0.4916 0.6658 1500 6.82 0.1744 0.4682 0.1322 0.4472 0.6185 2000 9.09 0.1726 0.4533 0.1266 0.4383 0.6036 2500 11.36 0.1689 0.4428 0.1246 0.4261 0.5930 3000 13.64 0.1693 0.4407 0.1248 0.4237 0.5902 

the model improves rapidly during the initial 2000 steps. A similar improvement is also observed in linguistic quality metrics, such as BLEU and METEOR, in Figure 6b. Classification-based metrics during the training process are depicted in Figure 7a while improvements in hallucination are shown in Figure 7b. The final evaluation of the test.tsv samples from the Common Voice 24.0 Assamese subset yields a character error rate (CER) of 13.18% and a word error rate (WER) of 43.75%. Improvements in semantic and linguistic quality are supported by a BLEU score of 30.81 and a METEOR score of 0.5262. The F1 score of 0.5826 indicates a balanced performance in capturing relevant linguistic tokens. 

: Preprint submitted to arXiv Page 18 of 30 Figure 5: Whisper-Small fine-tuning results for Assamese showing training and validation loss progression.                                    

> Table 6
> Semantic and Structural Performance Metrics for Assamese Whisper-Small Fine-Tuning
> Step BLEU F1 METEOR HR 𝑃 𝑟𝑒𝑑 HR 𝑅𝑒𝑓
> 500 14.78 0.4278 0.3640 0.0328 0.0399 1000 23.80 0.5186 0.4604 0.0321 0.0390 1500 28.68 0.5594 0.5124 0.0308 0.0373 2000 29.87 0.5727 0.5213 0.0243 0.0292 2500 30.84 0.5833 0.5352 0.0271 0.0328 3000 30.81 0.5841 0.5375 0.0260 0.0313

7.1.3. Comparison of the Fine-tuned Model with the Pre-trained Model 

The baseline performance of Whisper-small model in a Zero-shot setting yielded a Word Error Rate (WER) and a Character Error Rate (CER) of 2.0127 and 1.9091, respectively. The model produced incorrect transcriptions, rendering its performance unusable. An error rate exceeding 1.0 clearly indicates that the model is suffering from severe hallucination. Severity of hallucination is further confirmed by the HER 𝑝𝑟𝑒𝑑 

of 0.5552. In the Zero-Shot state, scores for BLEU, METEOR, and F1 were effectively zero, indicating no overlap with the reference text. Match Error Rate (MER) and Word Information Lost (WIL) of 1.0000 indicate a complete failure in transcription, and no information from the reference was successfully captured by the model. Table 7 shows the model’s transformation after fine-tuning. The transition of CER from 1.9091 to 0.1318 represents a fundamental shift in the model’s ability to map acoustic to phonetic representations in the Assamese language. This 93.10% relative improvement in CER indicates that our approach to controlled fine-tuning is essential for high-fidelity ASR in Assamese. The fine-tuned model yielding a WER of 0.4375 may not be impressive, but it achieves a relative improvement of 78.26% over the zero-shot baseline, demonstrating a significant improvement. In the Zero-Shot evaluation, the scores for BLEU, METEOR, and F1 were nearly zero, signifying no correspondence with the reference text. After the fine-tuning process, the model achieved a BLEU score of 30.8100 and an F1 score of 0.5826, demonstrating its improved capacity to produce semantically consistent sequences. The bar chart in Figure 8 clearly demonstrates this transition from a non-functional Zero-Shot (baseline) to a specialized Assamese ASR in terms of WER, CER, MER and WIL. A Significant reduction of 96.70% in hallucination error rate, as well as 32.38% improvement in efficiency of transcription, measured using real-time factor, is depicted in Figure 9.       

> :Preprint submitted to arXiv Page 19 of 30 (a) Error metrics (b) Text generation metrics
> Figure 6: Whisper-Small Fine-Tuning Results (Assamese)
> (a) Precision, Recall, F1-score Metrics (b) Hallucination Metrics
> Figure 7: Whisper-Small Fine-Tuning Results (Assamese)

7.1.4. Evaluation Metric Analysis 

Fine-tuned Whisper-small produces a significant improvement over the zero-shot evaluation with WER and CER of 43.75% and 13.18%, respectively. However, a substantial 30.51% gap remains between WER and CER. This gap between CER and WER is a classic characteristic of low-resource agglutinative languages (Bekarystankyzy, Razaque and Mamyrbayev, 2025). A lower CER of 13.18% is a phonetic success, indicating that the model can accurately map the Assamese scripts to their corresponding acoustic representations. But the model is still unable to understand the complex grammar of Assamese language. From the generated samples, it appears the model correctly identifies the root words but struggles with the suffix. For example, the root word “ পাহাৰ ” ( [pa.haô] ) is correctly identified, while it struggles with sufix ‘ ত’( [t ”] ) in “ পাহাৰত ”([pa.ha.ôOt ”] ). Additionally, in several instances, the model correctly identifies root words but struggles with word boundaries, where one word ends and a new one begins ( see sample 140, Table 11). Additionally, some words with similar acoustic sounds are produced despite their different visual representations, leading to non-existent words in Assamese ( see sample 57, Table 10). Another reason for the high Word Error Rate (WER) is its mathematical sensitivity. WER evaluates errors at the word level, meaning that if even a single   

> :Preprint submitted to arXiv Page 20 of 30

Table 7 

Comparison of Zero-shot with the Fine-tuned Model.                                                  

> Metric Zero-shot Fine-tuned Whisper-Small Absolute Reduction Improvement (%)
> WER 2.0127 0.4375 1.5752 78.26% CER 1.9091 0.1318 1.7773 93.10% MER 1.0000 0.4300 0.5700 57.00% WIL 1.0000 0.6481 0.3519 35.19% BLEU 0.0000 30.8100 30.8100 Ø
> METEOR 0.0000 0.5262 0.5262 Ø
> F1 Score 0.0000 0.5826 0.5826 Ø
> Precision 0.0000 0.5960 0.5960 Ø
> Recall 0.0000 0.5698 0.5698 Ø
> HER 𝑝𝑟𝑒𝑑 :0.5552 0.0183 0.5369 96.70% RTF 0.2943 0.1990 0.0953 32.38%

Figure 8: Performance Comparison of Zero-Shot (baseline) and Fine-tuned Whisper-Small model. 

character in a word is predicted incorrectly, the entire word is counted as wrong. As a result, minor spelling mistakes can significantly increase the WER value. In contrast, Character Error Rate (CER) measures errors at the character level. Therefore, when a character is predicted incorrectly, only that specific character is marked as an error rather than the whole word. Because of this difference, WER is generally more sensitive to small prediction errors, while CER provides a more fine-grained evaluation of transcription accuracy in any speech recognition model, and it is clearly justified in above analysis of the Whisper-small model performance. The fine-tuned model yields MER and WIL of 0.4300 and 0.6481, respectively. The difference between MER and WIL stems from the fact that MER measures the overall mismatch proportion, whereas WIL assesses the statistical independence between the two strings. Linguistic and semantic similarity are assessed using the BLEU and METEOR evaluation metrics. The proposed fine-tuned approach achieved a BLEU score of 30.81 and a METEOR score of 0.5262. BLEU focuses on precision, measuring how many of the predicted phrases are present in the reference. In contrast, METEOR emphasizes alignment and imposes penalties on matches that are fragmented. 

7.2. Qualitative Analysis 

The quantitative analysis in Section 7.1 provided a high-level view of our fine-tuned model’s performance. To understand the model’s performance at the granular level, two types of qualitative analysis, viz., 

Orthographic error and Morphological error , are examined on the predicted transcripts given in Table 

: Preprint submitted to arXiv Page 21 of 30 Figure 9: Performance Comparison of Zero-Shot (baseline) and Fine-tuned Whisper-Small model. 

8. These samples correspond to the same reference script used for the zero-shot evaluation of the model presented in Table 3 

Orthographic and morphological errors in Assamese arises due to a combination of phonetic similarity, orthographic ambiguity, retroflex–dental and aspirated–un-aspirated confusions, sibilant mergers, and grapheme–phoneme mismatches. Orthographic errors refer to discrepancies in graphetic and phonetic shifts, where the predicted word is phonetically correct or closely resembles the intended pronunciation, but its orthographic representation deviates from the standard spelling. In such cases, the model generates a word that sounds similar to the reference word but differs visually or textually. Confusion in the use of vowels (matras), Consonant aspiration or voicing, and homophonic substitutions are common orthographic errors in Assamese. Morphological Errors occur when the model correctly identifies the root word, but is unable to construct the grammatical structure. This typically involves the omission, addition, or substitution of suffixes, prefixes case markers, or other inflectional morphemes, including incorrect word boundary segmentation. A detailed analysis of the model for Orthographic and Morphological errors is discussed in the following sections 

7.2.1. Orthographic Error Analysis 

Analysis of the evaluated samples revealed that the predicted transcripts exhibit frequent vowel substitution errors, particularly among phonetically similar Assamese vowel diacritics. The most prominent confusions are observed between ‘ ◌ু ’([u]), ‘ ◌ূ ’ ([u:]), and ‘ ে◌া ’ ( [U] ), as well as between ‘ ি◌ ’ ([i]) and ‘ ◌ী ’([i:]), leading to vowel substitution errors. For instance, in Sample 327 in Table 9, the vowel ‘ ে◌া ’ associated with the character ‘ ক’ is misrecognized as ‘ ◌ু ’, resulting in the predicted word “ কুৰাণ ” ( [ku.ôan] ) instead of the reference word “ েকাৰআন ” ( [kU.ôa.an] ). Another vowel substitution error is seen in Sample 5, where the vowel ‘ ◌ী ’ associated with the character ‘ প’ ([p]) is incorrectly recognized as ‘ ি◌ ‘ resulting the predicted word as “ িপঠৰ ” ( [pi.t hOô] ) instead of “ পীঠৰ ” ( [pi:.t hOô] ). Such kind of substitution errors among vowel pairs viz.,{(‘ ে◌া ’, ‘ ◌ু ’), (‘ ◌ী ’, ‘ ি◌ ’), (‘ ◌ূ ’,‘ ে◌া ’)} are observed in samples 327, 140, and 377. Vowel omission errors are also seen in some instances as shown in Table 9. For example, in Sample 12 and 114, the ‘ ে◌া ’is omitted for the words “ েকালাত ” ( [kU.lat] ) and “ আেপানােলাকৰ ” ( [a.pU.na.lU.kOô] ). Similarly, ‘ ◌া ’ ([a]) were missing in Sample 379 and 57, whereas ‘ ে◌ ’ ([e]) is omitted in Samples 114. These patterns indicate that the model struggles to accurately capture temporal acoustic cues, leading to errors in grapheme representation. Phonetically motivated grapheme (character) substitution errors are also observed in several samples, as shown in Table 10. These errors refer to the replacement of a grapheme by another grapheme based on phonetic similarity, and are not restricted to consonantal substitutions only. For instance, in Sample 327, the conjunct consonant grapheme ‘ শব্ ’ ([xw]) is replaced by ‘ চ’ ( [s] ) resulting the predicted word “ চিৰপ ” ( [s.ôip] )  

> :Preprint submitted to arXiv Page 22 of 30

Table 8 

Qualitative comparison of ground-truth reference (REF) and model predictions (PRED) 

Sample No. Ground-truth reference (REF) and Model predictions (PRED) Outcomes 

5 REF: েকাৱা হয় েসই পীঠৰ মিন্ৰ সবব্র্পর্ থম িনমর্ াণ কিৰিছল নৰকাসুেৰ 

PRED: েকাৱা হয় েসই িপঠৰ মিণ্ৰশব্ বর্পর্ থম িনমর্ াণ কিৰিছল নৰক আশ‌ুেৰ 

12 REF: কন্া েদিখ মাকৰ েকালাত েহিৰ উিঠলৈগ 

PRED: খন্া েদিখ মাকৰ কলাত েহিৰ উিঠলৈক 

41 REF: লৰাজনক েসাধাত গম পােল তাৰ নাম পিবতর্ নাথ 

PRED: লৰাজনক েসাধাত গম পােল তাৰ নাম পিবতর্ নাথ 

52 REF: এবছৰ আেগেয় কানাডাৈল পলাই ৈগিছল 

PRED: এবছৰ আেগেয় কাণাডাৈলম পলােয় ৈগিছল 

57 REF: ঘৰৰ গৃিহণীৰ ওপৰেত েগােটই পিৰয়ালৰ সুখ দুখ িনভর্ৰ কেৰ 

PRED: ঘৰৰ গৃিঘনীৰ ওপৰেত েগােটই পিৰয়ালৰশ‌ু খেটাক িনপর্ াৰ কেৰ 

71 REF: মণ্লৰ ঘৰৰ পৰা খবৰ আিহল দৰা এিতয়াও ভাল েহাৱা নাই 

PRED: মণ্লৰ ঘৰৰ পৰা খবৰ আিহল ধৰাই িতয়াও ভাল েহাৱা নাই 

75 REF: িস চােগ েতামাৰ কথাশ‌ু না নাই আগেত 

PRED: িস চােগ েতামাৰ কথাশ‌ু না নাই আগেত 

114 REF: আগেত বন্বস্ ৈহিছল আেপানােলাকৰ ফালৰ মদন মণ্লৰ ভােয়কৰ লগত 

PRED: আগেত বন্ৱস্ ৈহিছল আপ্ােলাকৰ ফালৰ মদন মণ্লৰ ভায়কৰ লগত 

140 REF: কাণ্কাৰখানা েদিখ লিভতা আৰু লগৰ েছাৱালী েকজনী িনজৰ ঘৰৰ দু ৱাৰমুখত থুপ খােলৈগ 

PRED: কাণ্কাৰখনা েদিখ লিভতা আৰু লগৰ েছাৱালীেকইজনী িমজৰ ঘৰৰ দু ৱাৰমুখত েথাক খােলৈগ 

182 REF: লিভতাহঁেত উেত্িজত ৈহ বািহৰৰ ফােল চাবৈল ধেৰ 

PRED: লিভতাহঁেত উেত্িজত ৈহ বািহৰৰ ফােল চাবৈল ধেৰ 

276 REF: িবেশষৈকশর্ মান অভয় দু ৱৰা আৰুশর্ মান তৰুণ দু ৱৰাৰ বােবইেহ 

PRED: িবেশষৈকশর্ মান অভয় দু ৱৰা আৰুশর্ মান তৰুণ দু ৱৰাৰ বােবইেহ 

327 REF: েকাৰআনশব্ ৰীফ ইছলাম ধমর্ ৰ মূল ধমর্গর্ন্ 

PRED: কুৰাণচিৰপ ইছলাম ধমর্ৰ েমাল ধমর্গন্ 

345 REF: মানুহেটােৱ কেল ভালৈক িশক িনিশিকিব 

PRED: মানুহেটােৱ কেল ভালৈক িশক িনিশিকিব 

377 REF: তহঁতৰ েনা খায় েকােন 

PRED: তহঁতৰ দু খাই েকােন 

379 REF: মাষ্াৰ গেলই হয় 

PRED: মাষ্ৰ গেলই হয় 

instead of “ শব্ ৰীফ ” ( [xw.ôif]) . In another instance, as shown in Sample 377, semi-vowel ‘ য়’ ([j]) is replaced by vowel ‘ ই’ ([i]), resulting in the prediction “ খাই ” ( [k hai] ) instead of the correct form “ খায় ” ( [k haj] ). In Sample 57, “ গৃিহণীৰ ” ( [gôi.Hi.ni:ô] ) predicted as “ গৃিঘনীৰ ”( [gôi.g hi.n:iô] ), and in Sample 125, “ পুৰিণ ”([pu.ôO.Ni] ) was rendered as “ পুৰণী ” ( [pu.ôO.ni:] ), indicating that the model failed to distinguish between dental ‘ ন’ ([n]) and retroflex ‘ ণ’ ( [N] ). Although these substitutions are phonetically similar, they are orthographically incorrect. Assamese language uses several conjuncts, in which nearly similar sounds can be 

: Preprint submitted to arXiv Page 23 of 30 Table 9 

Orthographic Error Analysis (Vowel Substitution/Omission)                                                            

> Sample REF Word PRED Word Vowel Substitution(s) Vowel Omission(s)
> 5পীঠৰ িপঠৰ ◌ী →ি◌ –12 েকালাত কলা –ে◌া
> 114 ভােয়কৰ ভায়কৰ –ে◌
> 114 আেপানােলাকৰ আপ্েলাকাৰ –ে◌া
> 140 থুপ েথাক ◌ু →ে◌া –140 কাণ্কাৰখানা কাণ্কাৰখনা –◌া
> 327 েকাৰআন কুৰাণ ে◌া →◌ু –327 শব্ ৰীফ চিৰপ ◌ী →ি◌ –327 মূল েমাল ◌ূ →ে◌া –377 েনা দু ে◌া →◌ু –379 মাষ্াৰ মাষ্ৰ –◌া

Table 10 

Orthographic Error Analysis (Grapheme Substitution Errors                                                                                              

> Sample REF Word PRED Word Grapheme Substitution Found
> 5মিন্ৰ মিণ্ৰ ন→ণ,দ→ড
> 5সবব্র্শব্ বর্ স→শ
> 5নৰকাসুেৰ নৰক আশ‌ুেৰ স→শ
> 12 কন্া ঘণ্া ক→ঘ,ন্ →ণ্
> 12 উিঠলৈগ উিঠলৈক গ→ক
> 52 কানাডাৈল কাণাডাৈল ন→ণ
> 57 িনভর্ৰ িনপর্াৰ ভ→প
> 57 গৃিহণীৰ গৃিহনীৰ ণী →নী
> 57 সুখশ‌ু খস→শ
> 114 বন্বস্ বন্ৱস্ ব→ৱ
> 140 িনজৰ িমজৰ ন→ম
> 140 থুপ েথাক প→ক
> 327 েকাৰআন কুৰাণ ন→ণ
> 327 শব্ ৰীফ চিৰপশব্ →চ,ফ→প
> 327 ধমর্গর্ন্ ধমর্গন্গর্ →গ
> 377 েনা দু ন→দ
> 377 খায় খাই য়→ই

generated by different combinations of characters. “ মিন্ৰ ” ( [mOn.diô] ) and “ মিণ্ৰ ” ( [mON ˙ d˙ iô] ) makes similar acoustic sound in Sample 5. While the former is a correct word from the reference text, the latter is not an acceptable spelling. Sibilant shifts are also observed in Sample 57 where “ সুখ ” ( [xuk h]) became “ শ‌ু খ ”([xuk h]), replacing ‘ স’ ( [x] ) with phonetically similar consonant ‘ শ’ ( [x] ). The same pattern is also observed in Sample 5. Labial inconsistencies are also observed in some samples. This type of error arises when labial sounds are pronounced incorrectly or substituted with other labial sounds. For instance, in Sample 57, “ িনভর্ৰ ”([niôb HOô] ) is transcribed as “ িনপর্াৰ ” ( [niôpaô] ), by substituting ‘ ভ’ ( [b H]) with ‘ প’ ( [p] ). A similar pattern of error is also noticed in Sample 327, where ‘ ফ’ ( [f] ) is replaced by ‘ প’ ( [p] ). Aspiration confusion like ‘ ক’ ( [k] )to ‘ ঘ’( [g H]),‘ দ’ ( [d] ) to ‘ ধ’( [d H]), ‘ দ’ ( [d] ) to ‘ ড’ ( [d ˙ ]), ন’ ( [n] ) to ‘ দ’ ( [d] ), and ‘ প’ ( [p] ) to ক’ ( [k] ) are seen in Samples 12, 71, 5, 377, 140 respectively. Nasal inconsistencies are also observed in Samples 327, 57, 140, 327, 52, and 5. This type of error occurs due to the substitution between one nasal sound with another, such as ন’ ( [n] ), ম’ ( [m] ), and ণ’ ( [N] ). Conjunct loss error is also found in Sample 327, where ‘ গর্ ’ ( [gô] ) formed by the conjuction of ‘ গ ([g] ) and ৰ’ ( [ô] ) is missing in the word “ ধমর্গর্ন্ ” ( [d HOô.mO.gôOn.t HO] ) producing the transcribed word “ ধমর্গন্ ” ( [d HOô.mO.gOn.t HO] ). The above-discussed orthographic errors demonstrate that while the acoustic model achieved a high degree of phonetic literacy, it frequently misrepresents words 

: Preprint submitted to arXiv Page 24 of 30 Table 11                                   

> Morphological Error Analysis
> Sample REF Phrase PRED Phrase Morphological Errors Found
> 5সবব্র্পর্ থমশব্ বর্পর্ থম Word Boundary Error (Merging) 5নৰকাসুেৰ নৰক আশ‌ুেৰ Word Boundary Error (Splitting) 12 েকালাত েহিৰ কলা েধিৰ Suffix Omission (Loss of case marker ত)52 কানাডাৈল কাণাডাৈলম Suffix Addition (Overgeneration) 57 সুখ দুখশ‌ু খেটাক Lexical Substitution 71 দৰা এিতয়াও ধৰাই িতয়াও Word Boundary Error (Boundary Shifting) 114 আেপানােলাকৰ আপ্েলাকাৰ Suffix Substitution 140 েছাৱালী েকজনী েছাৱালীেকইজনী Word Boundary Error (Merging) 140 দুৱাৰমুখত েদাৱাৰ মুখত Word Boundary Error (Splitting) 327 েকাৰআনশব্ ৰীফ কুৰাণচিৰপ Word Boundary Error (Merging) + Lexical Substitution

visually due to limitations in its lexical knowledge. Detailed orthographic error analysis of all samples is reported in Table 9 and Table 10. 

7.2.2. Morphological Error Analysis 

The qualitative analysis of the fine-tuned model’s predicted outputs, presented in Table 8, identified several morphological errors, viz., word boundary errors, affix-related errors, and lexical substitutions, and different categories of morphological errors found are presented in Table 11. The most commonly observed morphological errors involve correctly identifying word boundaries, particularly word merging and splitting. For instance, in Sample 5, the correct phrase “ সবব্র্পর্ থম ” ( [xOô.bbO.pôO.t HOm] ) is incorrectly merged to form a single word, “ শব্ বর্পর্ থম ” ( [xOô.bbO.pôO.t HOm] ). The same error is also observed for the words “ েছাৱালী েকজনী ” ( [sU.wa.li ke.zO.ni] ) and “ েকাৰআনশব্ ৰীফ ” ( [kU.ôa.an xw.ôif] ) in Samples 140 and 327, respectively. In contrast, word splitting error is observed in Sample 5, where the word “ নৰকাসুেৰ ” ( [nOôOka.xuôe] ) is incorrectly segmented into two separate words, viz., “ নৰক ” ( [nOôOk] ”)and “ আশ‌ুেৰ ” ( [axuôe] ), disrupting the internal morphological structure of the word. The same pattern is seen for the word “ দুৱাৰমুখত ”([duwaômuk HOt] ) in Sample 140. A boundary shift due to acoustic overlap of vowels occurred in Sample 71, replacing “ দৰা এিতয়াও ” ( [dOôa etijao] ) by “ ধৰাই িতয়াও ” ( [d HOôai tijao] ). Another morphological error called lexical substitution is seen in Sample 57, where meaningful phrase “ সুখ দুখ ” ( [xuk H duk H]) (english meaning: happiness and sorrow ) is replaced by the non existent word “ শ‌ু খেটাক ” ( [xuk HtUk] ). Additionally, affix-related errors, viz., suffix omission, addition, and substitution, are also frequently observed in the predicted transcripts. For instance, a suffix omission error is observed in Sample 12, in which the locative case marker ‘ ত’([t]) is lost in the predicted word “ েকালাত েহিৰ ” ( [kUlat heri] ) for the reference word “ কলা েধিৰ ” ( [kOla d He˙ ri] ). In Sample 52, a suffix addition error is observed, where an unnecessary grapheme, ‘ ম’(/m/ ), is appended to the root word “ কানাডাৈল ” ( [kanad ˙ alei] ). This type of error can be termed as grapheme over-generation problem. Additionally, word distortion suffix substitution error is also observed in Sample 114, where the word “ আেপানােলাকৰ ” ( [a.pUna.lU.kOô] ) is altered into the grammatically incorrect word, “আপ্েলাকাৰ ” ( [apnO.lU.kaô] ). The vowel ‘ ে◌া ’ ( [U] ) in the root word “ আেপান ” (“ a.pUn ”) is deleted, and a conjunct character ‘ প্ ’ ( [pnO] ) is formed by combining the consonants, ‘ প’ ( [p] ) and ‘ ন’ ( [n] ). Additionally, an orthographical error is also observed in the form of the omission of the vowel ‘ ◌া ’ ( [a] ). The above findings indicate that accurate word boundary detection is crucial, and improving both tokenization and morpheme boundary identification is likely to reduce morphological errors, thereby contributing to a more robust and reliable ASR system. 

7.2.3. Correct Transcription Instances 

The Fine-tuned model encountered several challenges due to the complex morphology of the Assamese language and the need to adhere to standard orthographic patterns. Despite these difficulties, the model   

> :Preprint submitted to arXiv Page 25 of 30

achieved remarkable success in several aspects. A Character Error Rate (CER) of 13 .18 ~ demonstrates the ability of the model to effectively map acoustic signals to the corresponding script and generate orthographically correct transcripts. In contrast to the Zero-shot baseline, which failed to generate Assamese script, the fine-tuned model consistently produced it. The fine-tuned Whisper-Small successfully transcribed vowel-dense phonetic structure “ লৰাজনক েসাধাত গম পােল তাৰ নাম পিবতর্ নাথ ” ( [lOôa.dZO.nOk xO.d Hat gOm pale tar nam pO.bi.tôO nat H]) as shown at Sample 41 in Table 8. The model handles complex agglutinative morphology of the words like “ লৰাজনক ” ( [lOôa.dZO.nOk] ), consisting of the root word ‘ লৰা ’ ( [lO.ôa] meaning ‘ Boy ’), with a definitive suffix ‘ জন ’ ( [dZOn] ) that transforms into “ The boy ”, which is further agglutinated with an accusative case marker ‘ ক’ ( [kO] ). Another successful instance is observed in Smaple 276, in which the whole reference script “ িবেশষৈকশর্ মান অভয় দু ৱৰা আৰুশর্ মান তৰুণ দুৱৰাৰ বােবইেহ ” ( [bi.xe.xO.kei xôi.mAn Ob HOj duwOôa aôu xôi.man tOôun duwOôaôO ba.be.i.He] ) is successfully transcribed. A similar instance of accurate and successful transcription is noted in sample 75 as well. Multi-syllable words like “ কাণ্কাৰখানা ” ( [kan.d ˙ O.kaô.k Ha.na] ), “ লিভতাহঁেত ” ( [lO.b Hi.ta.HOn.te] ), “ মানুহেটােৱ ”([ma.nuH.tU.we] ), and “ িবেশষৈক ” ( [bi.xe.xO.kei] ) were handled elegantly by this model with limited or no error as demonstrated in Table 8. Auxiliary and terminal verbs like “ ৈগিছল ” ( [gOei.sil] ), “ কেৰ ” ( [kO.re] ), and “ খােলৈগ ” ( [k Ha.le.gOei] ) found in Samples 52, 57 and 140, respectively, and are correctly understood by the model. High-frequency Assamese words such as “ ঘৰৰ ” ( [g HO.ôOôO] ), “ পিৰয়ালৰ ” ( [pO.ôi.ja.lOôO] ), “ ইছলাম ”([islam] ), “ ধমর্ৰ ” ( [d HOô.mOôO] ), “ কিৰিছল ” ( [kO.ri.sil] ), “ হয় ” ( [HOj] ) were also transcribed without any error. Despite a relatively high Word Error Rate (WER), the Character Error Rate (CER) remains sufficiently low to preserve the semantic meaning of most sentences. Another notable milestone achieved by the model is its ability to correctly handle several conjunct consonants (juktaxar) in Assamese script. For instance, conjuncts viz., ‘ ন্ ’ (‘ ন’ + ‘ দ’), and ‘ স্ ’ (‘ স’ + ‘ ত’) in Sample 114 (Table 8) are correctly recognized in the word “ বন্ৱস্ ” ( [bOn.dO.wOs.tO] ). Analysis of the fine-tuned model’s transcripts clarifies quantitative reductions in MER and WIL, demonstrating the model’s ability to achieve semantic alignment while preserving information. Qualitative analysis of the transcripts reveals that, despite a relatively high WER, the generated sentences maintain high readability and semantic coherence. This claim is further supported by METEOR and BLEU scores achieved by the model. Additionally, qualitative analysis of the fine-tuned Whisper-Small reveals that the model is sufficiently optimized to capture phonetic cues from the acoustic signals. However, it exhibits limitations in understanding morphological boundaries and orthographic rules in agglutinative languages like Assamese. This observation suggests that, although the model demonstrates strong phonetic recognition capabilities, its implicit lexical and morphological modeling remains insufficient for precise transcription in low-resource linguistic settings. Therefore, further performance improvements may be achieved by integrating the acoustic model with explicit language models, rather than simply scaling the acoustic architecture. 

## 8. Conclusions and Future Works 

In this study, we have established a new performance benchmark for Assamese ASR through controlled fine-tuning of the Whisper-small architecture on the Common-Voice Corpus 24.0 Assamese subset. The results demonstrate the adaptability of open-source multilingual models to low-resource speech recognition tasks. To address hardware constraints, mixed-precision (FP16) training, reduced batch sizes, and gradient accumulation were implemented. The model achieved a stable convergence around 3000 steps with AdamW optimiser. The final evaluation of the model yields a WER of 43 .75 % and a CER of 13 .18 %. A significant improvement of 93 .10 % in CER over the zero-shot baseline is achieved. The model also achieved an 78 .26 %improvement in WER. The low CER value indicates that the model has efficiently adapted phonetic-to-grapheme conversion in Assamese scripts. The use of additional error-based metrics further validates the model’s proficiency, with reductions in MER to 0.4300 and WIL to 0.6481 from 1.0. The 30 .51 %gap between CER and WER results from the agglutinative nature and lack of lexicon in the Assamese language. Text quality measurements demonstrate significant improvements, with BLEU and METEOR scores increasing to 30 .81 and 0.5262 from 0.0 in the zero-shot evaluation, indicating better semantic and structural correspondence between the predicted and reference transcriptions. Improvement in precision, recall, and F1-score, rising from 0.0 in the zero-shot setting to balanced values 0.5960 , 0.5698 , and 0.5826 ,respectively, indicating enhanced reliability in token-level predictions. Furthermore, the hallucination rate fell   

> :Preprint submitted to arXiv Page 26 of 30

significantly from 0.5552 to 0.0183 . This indicates that the generated outputs are becoming more grounded. At the same time, the real-time factor (RTF) was enhanced from 0.2943 to 0.1990 , demonstrating more efficient inference after fine-tuning. Qualitative analysis reveals that the model is phonetically robust, with limited errors in morphological boundaries and suffix mutations. The fine-tuned acoustic model is highly competent, but it lacks linguistic knowledge. This rendered the bottleneck, preventing further improvements in WER. The proposed optimized model effectively learned phoneme-to-grapheme mappings, including Assamese conjunct characters (Juktaxar), and establishes a scalable framework for integrating a language model to develop a more robust ASR system for the Assamese language. Several study directions can be explored in future, based on the findings of this study. To address the discrepancy between WER and CER, future research will investigate integrating grammatical constraints into language models to reduce segmentation errors and suffix distortion. Furthermore, the use of larger Whisper variants with increased parameters will be explored to enhance overall system performance. Finally, an attempt will also be made to curate a high-quality Assamese speech dataset to improve coverage and robustness of the Whisper-based Assamese ASR system. 

## 9. Limitations 

Despite the significant performance improvements enabled by controlled fine-tuning, several constraints remain that define the current performance limits of Assamese Automatic Speech Recognition (ASR). The model configuration chosen for this study was dictated by the availability of computational resources. The training and testing were carried out using GPU resources available through the Kaggle research platform. Given the memory and computational constraints of these shared-GPU settings, the Whisper-Small architecture was chosen over its larger counterparts, such as Whisper-Medium or Whisper-Large-v3. Although the use of resource-efficient tactics like mixed-precision (FP16) training and gradient accumulation supported stable optimization, the reduced parameter capacity restricts its capacity to capture long-range contextual dependencies and intricate linguistic patterns. Employing larger-scale models with enhanced representational capacity could potentially enhance transcription accuracy and robustness. The model is evaluated on the publicly available Common Voice 24.0 Assamese dataset , which primarily consists of read speech recorded in fairly controlled acoustic conditions. Consequently, the model trained may show diminished robustness when applied to spontaneous conversations, dialectal differences, or noisy real-world acoustic environments. Assamese language exhibits significant regional variation, and dialects from regions like Lower Assam may introduce phonetic differences that are not adequately represented in the training dataset. Regional variation in Assamese, especially the dialects among Lower Assam and Upper Assam people, is not adequately represented in the training data, potentially affecting the performance of Whisper in recognizing Assamese speech. 

## References                    

> Agarwalla, S., Sarma, K.K., 2016. Machine learning based sample extraction for automatic speech recognition using dialectal assamese speech. Neural Networks 78, 97–111. doi: 10.1016/j.neunet.2015.12.010 .Akera, B., Nafula, E., Walukagga, P., Yiga, G., Quinn, J., Mwebaze, E., 2025. How much speech data is necessary for asr in african languages? an evaluation of data scaling in kinyarwanda and kikuyu. arXiv preprint arXiv:2510.07221 doi: 10.48550/arXiv.2510.07221 .Ardila, R., Branson, M., Davis, K., Kohler, M., Meyer, J., Henretty, M., Morais, R., Saunders, L., Tyers, F., Weber, G., 2020. Common voice: A massively-multilingual speech corpus, in: Proceedings of the 12th Language Resources and Evaluation Conference (LREC 2020), European Language Resources Association (ELRA), Marseille, France. pp. 4218–4222. doi: 10.48550/arXiv.1912.06670 .Baevski, A., Zhou, Y., Mohamed, A., Auli, M., 2020. Wav2vec 2.0: A framework for self-supervised learning of speech representations. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems 33, 12449–12460. doi: 10.48550/arXiv.2006.11477 .Banerjee, S., Lavie, A., 2005. METEOR: An automatic metric for MT evaluation with improved correlation with human judgments, in: Proceedings of the ACL Workshop on Intrinsic and Extrinsic Evaluation Measures for Machine Translation and/or Summarization, Association for Computational Linguistics, Ann Arbor, Michigan. pp. 65–72. doi: 10.3115/1626355. 1626389 .Bekarystankyzy, A., Razaque, A., Mamyrbayev, O., 2025. Integrated end-to-end multilingual method for low-resource agglutinative languages using cyrillic scripts. Journal of Industrial Information Integration 43, 100750. doi: 10.1016/j. jii.2024.100750 .

: Preprint submitted to arXiv Page 27 of 30 Bhandari, A., Harit, G., 2026. Post-ASR correction for low-resource Rajasthani language. ACM Transactions on Asian and Low-Resource Language Information Processing doi: 10.1145/3793254 .Bharali, S.S., Kalita, S.K., 2021. A comparative study of different features for isolated spoken word recognition using HMM with reference to assamese language. International Journal of Speech Technology 18, 673–684. doi: 10.1007/s10772-015-9311-7 .Bhat, C., Strik, H., 2025. Two-stage data augmentation for improved asr performance for dysarthric speech. Computers in Biology and Medicine 189, 109954. doi: 10.1016/j.compbiomed.2025.109954 .Burling, R., 2003. The tibeto-burman languages of northeastern india, in: Thurgood, G., LaPolla, R.J. (Eds.), The Sino-Tibetan Languages. 1st ed.. Routledge, London and New York. Routledge Language Family Series. chapter 11, pp. 169–191. doi: 10.4324/9780203221051-20 .Chen, C.Y., Hsu, Y.H., Chang, C.c., 2023. Accelerating hakka speech recognition research and development using the whisper model, in: Proceedings of the 35th Conference on Computational Linguistics and Speech Processing (ROCLING 2023), pp. 367–370. Chen, J., Chu, C., Li, S., Kawahara, T., 2024. Data selection using spoken language identification for low-resource and zero-resource speech recognition, in: 2024 Asia Pacific Signal and Information Processing Association Annual Summit and Conference (APSIPA ASC), IEEE. pp. 1–6. doi: 10.1109/APSIPAASC63619.2025.10848811 .Chen, W., Tian, J., Peng, Y., Yan, B., Yang, C.H.H., Watanabe, S., 2025. OWLS: Scaling laws for multilingual speech recognition and translation models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2502.10373 doi: 10.48550/arXiv.2502.10373 .Culotta, A., Wick, M.L., Hall, R.J., Marzilli, M., McCallum, A., 2007. Canonicalization of database records using adaptive similarity measures, in: Proceedings of the 13th ACM SIGKDD International Conference on Knowledge Discovery and Data Mining, Association for Computing Machinery. pp. 201–209. doi: 10.1145/1281192.1281217 .Das, H.C., Bhattacharjee, U., 2024. Assamese dialect identification using static and dynamic features from vowel. Journal of Advances in Information Technology 15, 306–317. doi: 10.12720/jait.15.2.306-321 .Davis, K.H., Biddulph, R., Balashek, S., 1952. Automatic recognition of spoken digits. The Journal of the Acoustical Society of America 24, 637–642. doi: 10.1121/1.1906946 .Davis, M., Dürst, M., 2001. Unicode Normalization Forms. Unicode Standard Annex #15. Unicode Consortium. URL: 

https://www.unicode.org/reports/tr15/ .De Vries, N.J., Davel, M.H., Badenhorst, J., Basson, W.D., De Wet, F., Barnard, E., De Waal, A., 2014. A smartphone-based asr data collection tool for under‑resourced languages. Speech Communication 56, 119–131. doi: 10.1016/j.specom.2013.07.001 .Deka, B., Nirmala, S.R., Samudravijaya, K., 2018. Development of assamese continuous speech recognition system, in: Proceedings of the 6th Workshop on Spoken Language Technologies for Under-Resourced Languages (SLTU 2018), ISCA. pp. 220–224. doi: 10.21437/SLTU.2018-46 .Dutta, D., Choudhury, R.D., Barman, U., 2022. Assamese speech-based vocabulary identification system using convolutional neural network. International Journal of Computing and Digital Systems 12, 1191–1202. doi: 10.12785/ijcds/120195 .El Hannani, A., Errattahi, R., Salmam, F.Z., Hain, T., Ouahmane, H., 2021. Evaluation of the effectiveness and efficiency of state-of-the-art features and models for automatic speech recognition error detection. Journal of Big Data 8, 5. doi: 10.1186/s40537-020-00391-w .Goyal, P., Dollár, P., Girshick, R., Noordhuis, P., Wesolowski, L., Kyrola, A., Tulloch, A., Jia, Y., He, K., 2017. Accurate, large minibatch sgd: Training imagenet in 1 hour. arXiv preprint arXiv:1706.02677 doi: 10.48550/arXiv.1706.02677 .Greer, K., Lowerre, B., Wilcox, L., 1982. Acoustic pattern matching and beam searching, in: ICASSP ’82. IEEE International Conference on Acoustics, Speech, and Signal Processing, IEEE. pp. 1251–1254. doi: 10.1109/ICASSP.1982.1171508 .Hanson, S.J., Pratt, L.Y., 1988. Comparing biases for minimal network construction with back-propagation, in: Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems 1, Morgan Kaufmann. pp. 177–185. Javed, T., Doddapaneni, S., Raman, A., Bhogale, K.S., Ramesh, G., Kunchukuttan, A., Kumar, P., Khapra, M.M., 2022. Towards building asr systems for the next billion users, in: Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence, pp. 10813–10821. doi: 10.1609/aaai.v36i10.21327 .Ji, Z., Lee, N., Frieske, R., Yu, T., Su, D., Xu, Y., Ishii, E., Bang, Y.J., Madotto, A., Fung, P., 2023. Survey of hallucination in natural language generation. ACM Computing Surveys 55, 1–38. doi: 10.1145/3571730 .Kalita, D., Borbora, K.A., Nath, D., 2022. Use of bidirectional long short term memory in spoken word detection with reference to the assamese language. Indian Journal of Science and Technology 15, 1364–1371. doi: 10.17485/IJST/v15i27.655 .Kapusta, J., Držík, D., Šteflovič, K., Nagy, K.S., 2024. Text data augmentation techniques for word embeddings in fake news classification. IEEE Access 12, 31538–31550. doi: 10.1109/ACCESS.2024.3369918 .Kaur, J., Singh, A., Kadyan, V., 2021. Automatic speech recognition system for tonal languages: State-of-the-art survey. Archives of Computational Methods in Engineering 28, 1039–1068. doi: 10.1007/s11831-020-09414-4 .Koenecke, A., Choi, A.S.G., Mei, K.X., Schellmann, H., Sloane, M., 2024. Careless whisper: Speech-to-text hallucination harms, in: Proceedings of the 2024 ACM Conference on Fairness, Accountability, and Transparency (FAccT ’24), ACM New York, NY, USA. pp. 1672–1681. doi: 10.1145/3630106.3658996 .Koudounas, A., La Quatra, M., Giollo, M., Siniscalchi, S.M., Baralis, E., 2025. Hallucination benchmark for speech foundation models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2510.16567 doi: 10.48550/arXiv.2510.16567 .Labied, M., Belangour, A., Banane, M., 2024. Assessing speech-to-text translation quality: An overview of key metrics, in: Proceedings of the 2024 International Conference on Decision Aid Sciences and Applications (DASA), IEEE, Casablanca, Morocco. pp. 1–6. doi: 10.1109/DASA63652.2024.10836447 .Lambamo, W., Srinivasagan, R., Jifara, W., 2023. Analyzing noise robustness of cochleogram and mel spectrogram features in deep learning based speaker recognition. Applied Sciences 13, 569. doi: 10.3390/app13010569 .

: Preprint submitted to arXiv Page 28 of 30 Leben, W.R., 2018. Languages of the world, in: Oxford Research Encyclopedia of Linguistics. Oxford University Press. doi: 10.1093/acrefore/9780199384655.013.349 .Liang, X., Khaw, Y.M.J., Liew, S.Y., Tan, T.P., Qin, D., 2025. Towards low-resource languages machine translation: A language-specific fine-tuning with lora for specialized large language models. IEEE Access , 46616 – 46626doi: 10.1109/ ACCESS.2025.3549795 .Liu, Y., Yang, X., Qu, D., 2024. Exploration of whisper fine-tuning strategies for low-resource asr. EURASIP Journal on Audio, Speech, and Music Processing 2024, 29. doi: 10.1186/s13636-024-00349-3 .Loshchilov, I., Hutter, F., 2019. Decoupled weight decay regularization, in: Proceedings of the 7th International Conference on Learning Representations (ICLR), New Orleans, LA, USA. doi: 10.48550/arXiv.1711.05101 .Lowerre, B., 1990. The HARPY speech understanding system, in: Waibel, A., Lee, K.F. (Eds.), Readings in Speech Recognition. Morgan Kaufmann Publishers Inc., San Francisco, CA, USA, pp. 576–586. doi: 10.1016/b978-0-08-051584-7.50053-x .Magalhães, R.P., Vasconcelos, D.J.R., Fernandes, G.S., Cruz, L.A., Sampaio, M.X., de Macêdo, J.A.F., da Silva, T.L.C., 2022. Evaluation of automatic speech recognition approaches. Journal of Information and Data Management 13, 303–318. doi: 10.5753/jidm.2022.2514 .Mahanta, S., 2012. Assamese. Journal of the International Phonetic Association 42, 217–224. doi: 10.1017/S0025100312000096 .Malah, D., 1979. Time-domain algorithms for harmonic bandwidth reduction and time scaling of speech signals. IEEE Transactions on Acoustics, Speech, and Signal Processing 27, 121–133. doi: 10.1109/TASSP.1979.1163210 .Medhi, B., Talukdar, P.H., 2015. Isolated assamese speech recognition using artificial neural network, in: 2015 International Symposium on Advanced Computing and Communication (ISACC), IEEE. pp. 141–148. doi: 10.1109/ISACC.2015.7377331 .Moral, D., 1997. North-east india as a linguistic area. Mon-Khmer Studies 27, 43–54. Morris, A.C., Maier, V., Green, P.D., 2004. From WER and RIL to MER and WIL: improved evaluation measures for connected speech recognition., in: Interspeech, pp. 2765–2768. doi: doi:10.21437/Interspeech.2004-668 .Mozilla Foundation, 2026. Common voice dataset. https://datacollective.mozillafoundation.org/ . Accessed: 7 Mar 2026. Nguyen-Duc, M., Nguyen, L.V., Nguyen-Ho-Nhat, H., Nguyen, T.H., Lee, O.J., 2025. A comparative study of deep audio models for spectrogram-and waveform-based singfake detection. IEEE Access 13, 15312–15325. doi: 10.1109/ACCESS.2025.3571728 .Papineni, K., Roukos, S., Ward, T., Zhu, W.J., 2002. Bleu: A method for automatic evaluation of machine translation, in: Proceedings of the 40th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics, Association for Computational Linguistics, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, USA. pp. 311–318. doi: 10.3115/1073083.1073135 .Perezhohin, Y., Santos, T., Costa, V., Peres, F., Castelli, M., 2024. Enhancing automatic speech recognition: effects of semantic audio filtering on models performance. IEEE Access 12, 155136–155150. doi: 10.1109/ACCESS.2024.3482970 .Polat, H., Turan, A.K., Koçak, C., Ulaş, H.B., 2024. Implementation of a whisper architecture-based turkish automatic speech recognition (asr) system and evaluation of the effect of fine-tuning with a low-rank adaptation (lora) adapter on its performance. Electronics 13, 4227. doi: 10.3390/electronics13214227 .Prasad, C., Rao, V.G.S., Naidu, R.C.A., et al., 2026. An asr transformer-based model for kannada speech-to-text transcription. Journal of Artificial Intelligence and Technology doi: 10.37965/jait.2026.0935 .Rabiner, L.R., 1989. A tutorial on hidden markov models and selected applications in speech recognition. Proceedings of the IEEE 77, 257–286. doi: 10.1109/5.18626 .Rabiner, L.R., Juang, B.H., 2006. Speech recognition, automatic: History, in: Brown, K. (Ed.), Encyclopedia of Language and Linguistics. 2 ed.. Elsevier, pp. 806–819. doi: 10.1016/B0-08-044854-2/00906-8 .Radford, A., Kim, J.W., Xu, T., Brockman, G., McLeavey, C., Sutskever, I., 2023. Robust speech recognition via large-scale weak supervision, in: International conference on machine learning, PMLR. pp. 28492–28518. doi: 10.48550/arXiv.2212.04356 .Saikia, P., Camilleri, M., 2019. Assamese case alignment shifts in progress, in: Proceedings of the LFG 2019 Conference, CSLI Publications, Canberra, Australia. pp. 251–271. Sarma, H., Saharia, N., Sharma, U., 2017. Development and analysis of speech recognition systems for assamese language using HTK. ACM Transactions on Asian and Low-Resource Language Information Processing (TALLIP) 17, 7:1–7:14. doi: 10.1145/3137055 .Sarma, M., Sarma, K.K., 2012. Segmentation and classification of vowel phonemes of assamese speech using a hybrid neural framework. Applied Computational Intelligence and Soft Computing 2012, 1–8. doi: 10.1155/2012/871324 .Sarma, M., Sarma, K.K., 2014. Phoneme-Based Speech Segmentation Using Hybrid Soft Computing Framework. volume 550 of Studies in Computational Intelligence . Springer International Publishing, Cham, Switzerland. doi: 10.1007/ 978-81-322-1862-3 .Sarma, M.P., Sarma, K.K., 2011. Assamese numeral speech recognition using multiple features and cooperative lvq-architectures. International Journal of Electrical and Electronics 5, 1. Sarma, V.M., 2025. Intersections between heritage, multilingualism, and education: Language acquisition in india. Frontiers in Human Neuroscience 19, 1538482. doi: 10.3389/fnhum.2025.1538482 .Shahnawazuddin, S., Thotappa, D., Sarma, B.D., Deka, A., Prasanna, S.R.M., Sinha, R., 2013. Assamese spoken query system to access the price of agricultural commodities, in: 2013 National Conference on Communications (NCC), IEEE. pp. 1–5. doi: 10.1109/NCC.2013.6488011 .Sharma, A.K., Pandya, M., Shukla, A., 2025. Fine-tuning whisper tiny for swahili asr: Challenges and recommendations for low-resource speech recognition, in: Proceedings of the Sixth Workshop on African Natural Language Processing (AfricaNLP 2025), Association for Computational Linguistics, Vienna, Austria. pp. 74–81. doi: 10.18653/v1/2025.africanlp-1.11 .Singh, A., Mehta, A.S., Nanavati, J., Bandekar, J., Basumatary, K., Badiger, S., Udupa, S., Kumar, S., Ghosh, P.K., Pai, P., et al., 2023. Model adaptation for asr in low-resource indian languages. arXiv preprint arXiv:2307.07948 

: Preprint submitted to arXiv Page 29 of 30 doi: 10.48550/arXiv.2307.07948 .Singh, S., Zhong, Z., Wang, Q., Mendes, C., Hasegawa-Johnson, M., Abdulla, W., Shahamiri, S.R., 2024. A comprehensive performance evaluation of whisper models in dysarthric speech recognition, in: Neural Information Processing. ICONIP 2024, Springer, Singapore. pp. 75–90. doi: 10.1007/978-981-96-6960-8_6 .Sourav, M.S.G., Javaid, A., Cheng, L., 2025. A review of ai in human‑machine cooperation: Machine perspective. ACM Transactions on Autonomous and Adaptive Systems 20, 1–24. doi: 10.1145/3774318 .Timmel, V., Paonessa, C., Vogel, M., Perruchoud, D., Kakooee, R., 2024. Fine-tuning whisper on low-resource languages for real-world applications. arXiv preprint arXiv:2412.15726 doi: 10.48550/arXiv.2412.15726 .Yu, D., Deng, L., 2015. Automatic Speech Recognition: A Deep Learning Approach. volume 1 of Signals and Communication Technology . Springer, London. doi: 10.1007/978-1-4471-5779-3 .de Zuazo, X., Navas, E., Saratxaga, I., Rioja, I.H., 2025. Whisper-lm: Improving asr models with language models for low-resource languages. arXiv preprint arXiv:2503.23542 doi: 10.48550/arXiv.2503.23542 .

: Preprint submitted to arXiv Page 30 of 30