DataMagic: Authoring Data Videos through Declarative Multi-Agent
Orchestration
Yupeng Xie
, Zhenyang Wang
, Liangwei Wang
, Jiayi Zhu
, Zhouan Shen
, and Yuyu Luo
Abstract—Data videos communicate data insights through dynamic charts, voice narration, and synchronized animations, and have
become a widely adopted form of data storytelling. However, their production requires multidisciplinary expertise spanning data
analysis, narrative design, and video editing. Static visualization tools lack narrative and animation capabilities; authoring tools rely on
pre-prepared charts rather than raw data; and pixel-level generation models, while capable of end-to-end synthesis, cannot guarantee
data accuracy or provenance. End-to-end automatic generation faces two core challenges: how to uniformly represent charts, narration,
and animations together with their temporal relationships, and how to efficiently search a vast design space for narrative-coherent
compositions. We present DATAMAGIC, a system that authors data videos from raw tabular data through declarative multi-agent
orchestration, built on two core designs. First, the declarative specification DVSPEC unifies charts, narration, and animations with
data-bound references and declarative synchronization, ensuring data provenance and automatic audio-visual alignment. Second,
a “Generate-then-Orchestrate” multi-agent strategy generates candidate scenes in parallel and then optimizes narrative coherence
through global orchestration. DVSPEC further serves as a shared state supporting three complementary interaction modes, bridging
full automation with fine-grained human control. Evaluations on 109 real-world samples show that even the most advanced LLM
(e.g., GPT-5) achieves only 2.13/5 with execution success rates between 48.62% and 86.24%; DATAMAGIC improves quality to 3.89
(+83%) with success rates above 95%, with the most significant gains in animation and narrative dimensions. A user study further
demonstrates that, compared to a conversational LLM workflow, DATAMAGIC significantly improves creation efficiency (79.7% reduction
in task time) and reduces perceived cognitive load. Source code is available at https://github.com/HKUSTDial/DataMagic.
Index Terms—data video generation, data storytelling, multi-agent system, declarative specification, visualization
1
INTRODUCTION
Data videos combine dynamic charts, voice narration, and animation ef-
fects into coherent temporal narratives, and have been widely adopted in
business reporting, journalism, and education [1,22,43,44]. Compared
with static charts or dashboards, data videos guide audiences along a cu-
rated narrative path to understand data, offering significant advantages
in communication efficiency and audience engagement [1]. However,
producing a high-quality data video requires multidisciplinary expertise
spanning data analysis, narrative design, and video editing, resulting in
high production costs and long cycles that severely limit the scalability
of this medium.
Existing approaches simplify parts of this workflow but none
achieves end-to-end automation from raw data to a complete video.
Static visualization tools (e.g., DeepEye [30,31], HAIChart [70], Deep-
VIS [54]) automate chart generation but lack narrative logic and an-
imation, producing isolated static graphics. Authoring tools (e.g.,
WonderFlow [66], Data Playwright [41]) introduce narrative-centered
paradigms that allow users to add animations and narration to indi-
vidual charts, but they take pre-made visualizations as their starting
point, cannot extract insights from raw data, and do not support multi-
scene narrative orchestration. Pixel-level video generation models (e.g.,
Sora [26], Veo3 [12]) can generate videos end-to-end, but their black-
box nature frequently produces numerical hallucinations and cannot
trace visual elements back to underlying data records. In summary,
existing approaches struggle to simultaneously achieve data fidelity,
narrative coherence, and end-to-end automation.
Our key observation is that effective data videos are fundamen-
tally structured narratives rather than simple assemblies of visual el-
• Yupeng Xie, Zhenyang Wang, Liangwei Wang, Jiayi Zhu, Zhouan Shen, and
Yuyu Luo are with The Hong Kong University of Science and Technology
(Guangzhou), Guangzhou, China. E-mail: yxie740@connect.hkust-gz.edu.cn,
wwwangzhenyang@gmail.com, lwang344@connect.hkust-gz.edu.cn,
jzhu351@connect.hkust-gz.edu.cn, zshen575@connect.hkust-gz.edu.cn, and
yuyuluo@hkust-gz.edu.cn. Yuyu Luo is the corresponding author.
Manuscript received xx xxx. 202x; accepted xx xxx. 202x. Date of Publication
xx xxx. 202x; date of current version xx xxx. 202x. For information on
obtaining reprints of this article, please send e-mail to: reprints@ieee.org.
Digital Object Identifier: xx.xxxx/TVCG.202x.xxxxxxx
ements [43]. A well-crafted data video typically consists of multiple
scenes, each organized around a distinct analytical insight with coordi-
nated charts, narration, and animations; scenes follow narrative logic
such as macro-to-micro or phenomenon-before-cause. This inspires us
to model end-to-end generation as a hierarchical content orchestration
problem: starting from a user query, the system makes decisions at the
level of macro narrative structure, scene-level content, and micro ani-
mation details. This modeling introduces two core challenges: (1) how
to design a unified intermediate representation that precisely describes
charts, narration, animations, and their temporal relationships while
ensuring data provenance; (2) how to efficiently search the vast design
space of insights, chart types, and narrative paths for globally coherent
compositions across multiple scenes.
To address these challenges, we propose DATAMAGIC, which au-
thors data videos through declarative multi-agent orchestration that
combines a declarative specification for unified audio-visual representa-
tion with a multi-agent pipeline for narrative-coherent scene generation.
For challenge (1), we design DVSPEC (Data Video Specification), a
declarative specification that decomposes data videos into an ordered
scene sequence, where each scene contains content, narration, and ani-
mation components. DVSPEC binds visual and animation elements to
underlying data fields through data-driven semantic references, and re-
places manual timestamps with narration-indexed triggering to achieve
declarative audio-visual synchronization (Section 4). For challenge (2),
we propose a “Generate-then-Orchestrate” multi-agent strategy: in the
generation stage, agents with distinct roles collaborate in parallel to
produce diverse candidate scenes; in the orchestration stage, scenes
are globally selected and ordered based on insight value and query
coverage, with context-aware narration generated to ensure narrative
coherence. DVSPEC further serves as a shared editable state supporting
three interaction modes (canvas manipulation, script editing, and nat-
ural language commands), bridging full automation with fine-grained
human control (Section 5).
We evaluate DATAMAGIC on 109 real-world samples across five
quality dimensions and conduct a within-subjects user study. Results
show that even the most advanced LLM (GPT-5) achieves only 2.13/5
with execution success rates between 48.62% and 86.24%; DATAM-
AGIC improves quality to 3.89 (+83%) with success rates above 95%.
The user study further confirms that, compared to a conversational
LLM workflow, DATAMAGIC significantly improves creation efficiency
arXiv:2609.33403v1  [cs.HC]  27 Sep 2026


(79.7% reduction in task time) and reduces perceived cognitive load.
The main contributions of this paper include: (1) DVSPEC: a declar-
ative specification for data videos that unifies charts, narration, and
animations with their temporal relationships through semantic refer-
ences and narration-indexed triggering; (2) Multi-agent framework: a
“Generate-then-Orchestrate” two-stage strategy for parallel candidate
scene generation and global narrative orchestration; (3) Interactive
system: a complete web-based system supporting three complementary
interaction modes over a shared DVSPEC state; and (4) Comprehen-
sive evaluation: systematic experiments on 109 real-world samples
and a within-subjects user study (N = 12) confirming practical utility.
2
RELATED WORK
2.1
Data Video Authoring
Prior research has established theoretical foundations for data video
creation from perspectives including narrative structure [1], anima-
tion design primitives [61], and motion design space [52], among
others [73]. Building on these foundations, various authoring tools
have been developed to lower production barriers. Guided by Chen et
al.’s automation-level taxonomy of narrative visualization tools [6], we
focus on two categories most relevant to data-video creation: human-
in-the-loop authoring and automated generation.
Human-in-the-loop authoring and animation-design approaches
retain substantial user control while reducing manual effort: Data-
Clips [2] lets users compose, edit, and assemble clips from a reusable
data-driven library to form complete data-video sequences; VisCom-
mentator [8] supports rapid prototyping of augmented sports videos
by combining machine-learning-based data extraction with visualiza-
tion recommendations; WonderFlow [66] and Data Playwright [41]
provide narration-centric workflows for linking narration with visual
elements and authoring instructions; Shen et al. [49] further support
authoring data-driven chart animations through direct manipulation;
Kineticharts [18] presents an affective animation design scheme for
enhancing the expressiveness of charts in data stories; and Gemini2 [17]
supports keyframe-oriented chart-animation authoring by generating
transitions between statistical graphics; see Section 2.3.
Automated-generation systems automate larger parts of the produc-
tion workflow: InfoMotion [65] automatically generates animated
presentations from static infographics; AutoClips [50] generates data
videos from a tabular dataset and a pre-specified sequence of data
facts by selecting, arranging, and configuring animated clips; Data
Player [47] takes an existing visualization and text input, establishes
semantic links between narration and visual elements with LLMs,
and plans animation sequences through constraint solving; Narrative
Player [40] takes a pre-written narrative paragraph paired with a cor-
responding data table and generates a coherent visualization sequence
with transition animations and audio narration; and Shen et al. [42]
explore multi-agent workflows for automatic data-video creation.
These systems differ in their input assumptions and design focus:
some begin from existing visual artifacts, narration scripts, or pre-
extracted data facts; others emphasize agentic generation workflows
rather than an explicit shared declarative representation for cross-scene
coordination. Recent empirical work [46] further examines how em-
pirical findings have informed data-video creation tools, motivating
the need to ground tool design in authors’ workflows and creation
needs. DATAMAGIC complements these approaches by starting from
raw tabular data, jointly selecting and ordering scenes through multi-
agent orchestration, and binding charts, narration, and animations in a
shared declarative representation that makes cross-scene coherence and
localized interactive editing explicit.
2.2
Automated Data Storytelling
Automated data storytelling seeks to turn a data table into a narrative
woven from data facts. Most existing work follows a data-fact-driven
route: it extracts statistical facts from the table and then uses rules or
search to select, order, and compose them into a story. DataShot [67] ag-
gregates facts into fact sheets, Calliope [51] uses a logic-oriented search
to find a coherent fact sequence, CoInsight [24] organizes connected
insights in hierarchical tables, and Erato [56] interpolates between
user-specified facts to support collaborative editing. With the rise of
large language models, recent work instead uses LLMs to generate
the narrative and its visualizations directly; He et al. [13] survey how
foundation models are applied across the stages of narrative visual-
ization. For instance, DataNarrative [15] pairs a generator with an
evaluator to produce stories that interleave text and visualizations, and
InReAcTable [3] turns this construction into an interactive process.
Both lines of work, however, produce static output (fact sheets, docu-
ments, or chart sequences) that conveys insight through still graphics
rather than motion and voice. DATAMAGIC targets a different medium:
starting from raw tabular data, it decides which facts to tell and how to
arrange them, and further produces multi-scene data videos that unify
animation, narration, and temporal synchronization through a shared
declarative representation.
2.3
Declarative Visualization and Animation Specifications
Declarative specifications have achieved widespread success in the
visualization field by decoupling logical description from rendering
implementation [7,32,45]. D3 [5] pioneered the data-driven documents
paradigm, while Vega-Lite [39] provides a concise grammar for interac-
tive graphics. In the animation domain, Canis [11] designed a high-level
language for chart animations, Gemini [16] provides a recommender
system for animated transitions, and its successor Gemini2 [17] further
automates transition generation, Animated Vega-Lite [77] unifies ani-
mation with the grammar of interactive graphics, and CAST [10] and
Data Animator [62] support animation authoring through keyframes.
These specifications excel at describing individual charts and chart
animations, including transitions between chart states, but do not cover
the multi-modal, multi-scene requirements of data videos that integrate
charts, narration, and synchronized animation. DVSPEC extends them
with data-driven semantic references for robustness and provenance,
narration-indexed triggers for declarative audio-visual synchronization,
and scene-level organization for multi-scene narratives.
3
DESIGN REQUIREMENTS
Automatic data video generation requires coordinating data process-
ing, visualization design, narration authoring, and animation config-
uration into coherent narrative sequences. Prior work on data video
authoring workflows [1, 47] and tool design [43] reveals several re-
curring difficulties: cross-modal references that break upon content
changes, narration–animation synchronization that depends on manual
time alignment, the absence of scene-level structural organization, and
the lack of systematic global narrative orchestration.
In this work, we focus on multi-scene data videos generated from
tabular data, in which insights are communicated through data-bound
charts, narration, and synchronized animation. To clarify the practical
scope of the system, we make explicit several design aspects: the chart
forms available in the current implementation, the narrative structures
that guide scene sequencing and script generation, and the shared visual
settings and scene-specific layouts used across different scene types.
Building on these observations and an analysis of the capability bound-
aries of existing tools, we derive four design requirements organized
from lower-level representation to higher-level interaction.
DR1: Scene-driven modular organization. Prior research shows
that effective data videos are typically composed of multiple seman-
tically independent scenes, each conveying a distinct analytical in-
sight [1,71]. Workflow studies further indicate that authors naturally
organize and edit content at the scene level during production [47].
However, pixel-level generation methods treat a video as a continuous
stream of frames, with no explicit scene boundaries: intermediate re-
sults are opaque, and local edits require regenerating the entire video.
The system should therefore treat scenes as the primary semantic unit
of content organization, enabling each scene to be independently gener-
ated, rendered, and edited, thereby providing a foundation for modular
content production and flexible narrative composition.
DR2: Data-bound declarative audio-visual synchronization. Pro-
ducing data videos requires establishing semantic references among
narration, charts, and animated visual elements to maintain cross-
modal consistency [9,63]. Existing tools rely on manually specified


Scene Sequence S
[s1,s2,...,sn]
DVSpec Structural Components
Scene Unit si
Content
Narration
[n1,n2,...,nk]
Animation
[a1,a2,...,ak]
chart, 
stat_cards...
chart type, 
data, style...
Type
Specify & Construct
{
  "meta": { Meta Config (M) },
  "scenes": [
    {
      "id": "scene_1",
      "type": "opening",
      "content": { Title, Background, Style },
      "narration": [ { Narration Unit 1 } ],
      "animations": [ ]
    },
    {
      "id": "scene_2",
      "type": "chart",
      "content": { Chart Type, Data, Binding, Style },
      "narration": [ { Narration Unit 1 },
                            { Narration Unit 2 },  ],
      "animations": [ { Entrance Anim },
        { Emphasis Anim (Target: "MQ")},
        { Emphasis Anim (Target: "AA")}, ]
    },
    // ... more scenes (e.g. stat_cards, closing) ...
  ]
}
Scene2
Scene1
Language-Specific Converters
Visualization
Vega-Lite
ECharts 
D3.js 
...
Rendered Video
...
Animation
GSAP
Anime.js
Remotion
...
(a) Declarative Grammar for Data Videos
(b) Composition & Rendering Flow
Fig. 1. DVSPEC structure and rendering flow.
DOM identifiers and absolute timestamps to implement such bind-
ings [11,41,47]; these hard-coded references are fragile and break when
data is updated, chart types are changed, or narration text is revised,
leading to substantial rework. The system therefore needs a unified
intermediate representation that (1) references visual elements by data
attribute values rather than rendering identifiers, ensuring references
remain valid across data and chart changes while guaranteeing that ev-
ery visual element is traceable to the underlying data; and (2) replaces
absolute timestamps with a declarative trigger mechanism, deferring
temporal alignment to the render stage rather than requiring manual
computation during authoring.
DR3: Global narrative orchestration. Existing AI-assisted data
video tools primarily support the generation of individual components
(e.g., charts or scripts) while providing limited support for organizing
multiple scenes into globally coherent narratives [43]. High-quality
data videos require accurate per-scene content and coherent narrative
logic across scenes, such as a progression from macro to micro or from
phenomenon to cause [1,73]. Greedy scene-by-scene generation easily
produces information redundancy or narrative discontinuities. The
system should therefore support global optimization over a candidate
scene pool: selecting a scene subset based on insight value and query
coverage, planning the playback order, and generating context-aware
narration to ensure smooth and coherent scene transitions.
DR4: Human-in-the-loop refinement via multi-modal interac-
tion. Fully automated generation cannot anticipate all user preferences
regarding visual style, narration tone, and analytical focus [58–60].
Prior work on visualization and data-video authoring highlights that iter-
ative refinement is central to real-world creation workflows [43,47,48].
Moreover, different users favor different interaction modalities: some
prefer direct manipulation of visual elements [28, 29], others prefer
editing structured scripts [55], and still others prefer issuing natural
language commands [21,69]. The system should support complemen-
tary editing modalities over a shared representation, enabling users to
switch among them without losing context and bridge full automation
with fine-grained human control throughout the authoring process.
4
DVSPEC:
A DECLARATIVE SPECIFICATION
FOR DATA
VIDEOS
Existing declarative visualization specifications (e.g., Vega-Lite [39],
Canis [11]) perform well for static charts or single-chart animations,
but have not been extended to the unified description of cross-modal
content and temporal coordination required for multi-scene data videos.
To fill this gap, we propose DVSPEC (Data Video Specification), a
declarative specification for data videos. Drawing on declarative design
principles from the visualization grammar field [5,39,47,53], DVSPEC
decouples logical description from rendering implementation to provide
a unified intermediate representation.
DVSPEC takes scenes as its core organizational unit, decompos-
ing a video into a self-contained scene sequence; within each scene,
data-driven semantic references bind visual and animation elements
to underlying data fields; animation trigger timing is declared through
narration indices and resolved automatically at render time. As shown
in Figure 1, DVSPEC encodes the video as a JSON object compiled by
a language-agnostic renderer.
4.1
Task Definition
We define data video generation as a mapping function from structured
data to audiovisual narrative: V = F(D,Q), where D represents the
dataset, Q represents the user query, and V is the generated data video.
This task requires the system to understand the analytical intent in Q,
extract data insights from D, and transform them into visual charts,
narration scripts, and synchronized animations, ultimately composing
coherent audiovisual content.
To address the temporal complexity of video generation, we rep-
resent the temporal content of V as an ordered sequence of scenes:
S = [s1,s2,...,sn]. Each scene si is a self-contained semantic unit,
formalized as a 5-tuple:
si := (id,type,content,narration,animation)
where id is a unique identifier, type defines the scene type (e.g.,
chart, opening, stat_cards, closing), content encapsulates the
visualization configuration, narration is a sequence of narration seg-
ments, and animation is a list of animation effects. This definition
forms the basis for the three mechanisms described below.
4.2
Scene-Driven Organization
DVSPEC formalizes a data video as a structure containing metadata
and a scene sequence: V := (M,S). The metadata M defines the global
properties of the video (e.g., title, resolution), while S is the ordered
scene sequence defined in Section 4.1, with each scene following the
structure specified above. At the video level, metadata provides global
presentation settings shared across scenes; at the scene level, style
and layout parameters in content express local visual organization
matched to each scene’s role. Together, these fields support a coherent
visual identity across the video while allowing different scene roles,
such as chart, opening, stat-card, and closing scenes, to use role-specific
forms.
Taking the “Daily Revenue Trend” scene in Figure 2 as an example,
its content field (①) encapsulates the complete chart configuration,
including the chart type (line_chart), data binding rules (date on
x-axis, revenue on y-axis), a data slice with 30 data points (②), and
visual style and layout parameters.
The narration field of a scene is an ordered list of narration seg-
ments [n0,n1,...,nk−1] (③in the figure). After text-to-speech (TTS)
processing [36], each narration segment n j is assigned text content and
a precise time range, formalized as:
nj := (text,time_start,time_end)
The animation field of a scene is a list of animation effects
[a0,a1,...,am−1]. Each animation effect aℓis formalized as a 4-tuple:
aℓ:= (type,target_data,trigger,style)
where type is the animation type (e.g., emphasis), target_data is
a semantic reference, trigger is the trigger timing index, and style
contains animation style parameters.
This scene-driven organization provides a modular and extensible
foundation. By combining different scene types, the system can con-
struct diverse narrative structures, while the self-contained nature of
scenes facilitates parallel processing and independent rendering.
4.3
Data-Driven Semantic Referencing
In data videos, animation effects must precisely target specific visual
elements, such as highlighting a data point on a particular date or
emphasizing a specific bar. Traditional approaches use hard-coded


4
4
Highlight peak revenue on Jan 30th
2
1
Build line chart for revenue trend
3
Narrate fluctuating revenue with audio
2
Supply daily revenue data points
3
1
Fig. 2. A DVSPEC specification example for one scene, where the num-
bered markers (1–4) link each declarative field (chart, data, narration,
and emphasis animation) to its effect in the rendered scene.
rendering identifiers (e.g., DOM IDs) for this purpose. While workable
in static settings, this is fragile in automated generation: changes in
data ordering, chart type (e.g., from line to bar), or datasets may cause
identifiers to point to wrong elements or become invalid.
DVSPEC adopts a semantic referencing mechanism based on data
attribute values. Each animation’s target_data field specifies a set of
key-value pairs (e.g., {"sale_date": "2025-01-30"}) rather than
rendering-layer identifiers. At render time, the system retrieves all
records satisfying these conditions from the scene’s dataset and binds
the animation to the corresponding chart nodes.
As shown in Figure 2 (④), the animation references the January 30
data point via {"sale_date": "2025-01-30"}. Regardless of data
ordering or chart type changes, this reference always resolves to the
correct visual element as long as the data structure is preserved. This
mechanism provides two benefits: referencing robustness, as the logical
description is fully decoupled from rendering implementation without
requiring the generation stage to anticipate rendering details; and data
provenance, as every visual element can be precisely traced back to
its underlying data record, providing a structured foundation for the
provenance-based interaction described in Section 5.
4.4
Narration-Indexed Declarative Triggering
Audio-visual synchronization is the defining characteristic that distin-
guishes data videos from static visualizations. Traditional approaches
require creators to manually specify an absolute timestamp for each
animation. When narration text is revised or speaking rate changes,
every timestamp must be recalculated, which is prohibitively costly in
automated generation and iterative editing.
DVSPEC replaces absolute timestamps with declarative trig-
ger relations.
Given a scene’s narration sequence Narration =
[n0,n1,...,nk−1], each animation’s trigger field specifies the index
of the narration segment that fires it (trigger ∈[0,k −1]∪{null}). If
trigger is null, the animation executes at scene start; otherwise, it
fires when the specified segment plays. At render time, the system
automatically computes the precise trigger moment from the actual
audio duration produced by TTS [36].
As shown in Figure 2 (④), trigger: 1 fires the animation when
the second narration sentence (③) plays. When the user revises the
narration text, TTS regenerates the audio and trigger timing updates
automatically, with no manual adjustment required.
This declarative mechanism separates the logical intent of “when to
trigger” (expressed via narration index) from the physical computation
of the exact trigger moment (resolved by the renderer). For automated
generation, the multi-agent system only needs to specify the logical
correspondence between animations and narration segments, without
predicting final audio durations. For interactive editing, synchronization
is automatically maintained after narration changes, eliminating the
burden of manual timeline adjustment.
Together, the three mechanisms form the complete design of
DVSPEC, providing a unified intermediate representation for both
automated generation and interactive editing.
5
SYSTEM FRAMEWORK
The generation of data videos involves complex dependencies among
data processing, visual design, and narrative logic. Single-stage ap-
proaches struggle to ensure both per-scene accuracy and overall nar-
rative coherence: sequential scene-by-scene generation locks in early
decisions based on local information, leading to narrative repetition
or coverage gaps; attempting to generate the full video at once faces
combinatorial explosion in the design space.
Our core insight is that video generation can be decoupled into
two relatively independent subproblems: scene content generation,
which focuses on accurately expressing individual analytical tasks, and
global sequence orchestration, which focuses on logical flow and tem-
poral alignment across scenes. The orchestration targets video quality
across five dimensions (Intent, Insight, Narrative, Animation, Aesthetic)
subject to default constraints on total duration (60–120 seconds) and
initial scene count (k ≤7) [1]. Based on this, DATAMAGIC adopts a
“Generate-then-Orchestrate” strategy implemented through two collab-
orative phases, as shown in Figure 3 and Algorithm 1. In the candidate
scene generation phase, the Story Planner, Data Manager, and Visual
Designer collaborate to produce diverse candidate scenes in parallel. In
the global narrative orchestration phase, the Narration Director and An-
imation Coordinator handle scene selection, ordering, and audio-visual
synchronization. All agents collaborate through DVSPEC as a unified
interface; detailed agent prompts are provided in Appendix C.
5.1
Candidate Scene Generation
The goal of this stage is to generate a diverse candidate pool covering
multiple analysis dimensions.
Task Decomposition. The Story Planner hierarchically decomposes
the user query Q (Algorithm 1, Line 2), identifying key analytical di-
mensions from the dataset’s field characteristics (e.g., temporal trends,
categorical comparisons, geographic distributions) and splitting the
high-level query into independent subtasks {qi}. For example, the
query “analyze sales performance” might be decomposed into “revenue
trend analysis,” “regional comparison,” and “product profit contribu-
tion.” The decomposition follows an orthogonality principle: each
subtask corresponds to an independent analytical perspective, maximiz-
ing the diversity of candidate scenes.
Data Extraction. For each subtask qi, the Data Manager plans a
data processing workflow and automatically generates Python code
to extract, filter, and aggregate relevant data from the source table,
producing a micro-dataset Di targeted at that analytical objective
(Line 6) [14, 20, 23]. Separating data extraction from visualization
design allows the data processing logic to be independently veri-
fied [75,76], and the same data slice can support exploration of multiple
visualization schemes.
Visualization Design. The Visual Designer designs the visualiza-
tion scheme based on Di (Line 7), selecting a chart type matched
to the analytical task and data characteristics, configuring data bind-
ings and style parameters, and extracting key statistical insights (e.g.,
extrema, trend directions, notable differences) [27, 33, 34, 37]. The
current implementation centers on common data-bound statistical chart
families, such as bar, line, area, scatter, pie, and heatmap charts; the


DVSPEC
Stage 1: Candidate Scene  Generation
Story Planner
Data Manager
Data Processing Planning
Task Decomposition
Parallel Execution
Candidate Scenes
S1
S1
subquery
analytic type
data field
type
priority
...
Sn
Sn
Stage 2:  Global Narrative Orchestration 
Animation Coordinator
Narration Director
title
narration
Narration-Synchronized Animation
Scene Re-rank
Marketing Spend vs. Return Rate by Region
...we examine how our regional marketing 
spend drives performance results.
Narration Generation
entrance
emphasize
leave
Input
Data
Query
“Analyze Q4 revenue 
peaks, regional 
marketing efficiency, and 
top product profit 
contributors ....”
Visual Designer
Chart Specification
Insight Summary
chart type style
data binding insight
S2
...
S2
...
Python/Pandas
We start by identifying our 
core profit drivers among our 
product lineup.
Laptop Pro X ... 55% of total 
... 4K Monitor ... around 20%. 
The other three together ...
Script Editing
NL Command
What can I do for you?
DVSpec field
DVSpec fields  DVSpec field
......
Swap scene 2 and 3
Interactive Refinement
Direct Manipulation
Output
Data Video
Fig. 3. System architecture of DATAMAGIC.
Algorithm 1 DATAMAGIC Generation Process
Require: Query Q, Dataset D
Ensure: Video V
1: // Candidate Scene Generation
2: tasks ←Planner.Decompose(Q,D)
3: pool ←[]
4: for each q ∈tasks do
5:
s ←InitScene(q)
6:
s.data ←DataManager.Extract(q,D)
7:
s.visual ←Designer.Design(s.data)
8:
pool.add(s)
9: end for
10: // Global Narrative Orchestration
11: (S∗,π∗) ←Director.Select(pool,Q)
12: V ←InitVideo()
13: for j = 1 to |S∗| do
14:
s ←S∗[π∗[j]]
15:
ctx ←BuildContext(S∗,π∗, j)
16:
s.narration ←Director.Narrate(s,ctx)
17:
s.animation ←Animator.Sync(s.vis,s.narr)
18:
V.scenes.append(s)
19: end for
20: return V
available range is jointly shaped by the agent prompts, underlying
model capabilities, and implemented rendering components, and can
be broadened by extending the corresponding rendering components
and generation rules. These chart specifications and scene-level visual
configurations are written into DVSPEC’s type and content fields.
Notably, the narration and animation fields are intentionally left
unfilled at this stage, keeping visualization generation decoupled from
narrative construction; narration and animation require global context
and are handled in the orchestration phase.
All candidate scenes are collected into the candidate pool (Line 8)
for global optimization.
5.2
Global Narrative Orchestration
The candidate generation stage produces a pool of scenes that are in-
dividually coherent but narratively independent. This stage organizes
the discrete candidate materials into a coherent audio-visual narra-
tive through three steps: scene selection and ordering, context-aware
narration generation, and audio-visual synchronization binding.
Scene Selection and Ordering. The Narration Director selects a
subset S∗from the candidate pool and plans the playback order π∗(Al-
gorithm 1, Line 11). Selection is guided by two criteria: insight value
(whether the scene reveals a meaningful pattern in the data) and query
coverage (whether the selected scenes collectively address all aspects
of the user query). Ordering and script generation follow a narrative
pattern matched to the shape of the data story. The pattern guides scene
ordering, climax placement, pacing, and transition style: Freytag’s Pyra-
mid by default and otherwise an inverted-pyramid, comparison-driven,
time-driven, or drill-down structure. These patterns are consistent with
the narrative structures studied in data storytelling [1,73].
Context-Aware Narration Generation. With the scene sequence
and narrative pattern determined, the Director generates the opening,
scene narrations, optional stat cards, and closing for the video (Line 16).
Rather than generating each scene’s narration in isolation, the system
uses a sliding window mechanism: the BuildContext() function
constructs context from the current scene’s position in the sequence
(Line 15), incorporating the content and insights of adjacent scenes
into the prompt. This allows the Director to generate narration that
naturally bridges scenes. For example, when the preceding scene
analyzed overall revenue trends, the next scene’s narration can open
with “Let us now examine regional performance in detail” rather than
reintroducing background context. This mechanism helps maintain
narrative continuity across scene transitions.
Audio-Visual Synchronization Binding. The Animation Coor-
dinator handles final audio-visual alignment (Line 17). It analyzes
data entities mentioned in each narration segment (e.g., specific prod-
uct names, dates, or values), uses DVSPEC’s semantic referencing
to bind these entities to corresponding visual elements, and specifies
trigger timing via narration indices. For example, when the narration
states “Laptop Pro X contributed 55% of revenue,” the Coordinator gen-
erates an emphasis animation targeting {"product": "Laptop Pro
X"} with its trigger set to the index of that narration segment. The
visual highlight and voice narration are thus logically bound at the
declarative level; the precise timestamp is automatically computed by
the renderer from the TTS audio duration.
The complete DVSPEC configuration is compiled by the rendering
engine into the final video, with narration text synthesized into speech
via TTS [36]. The system adopts a model-agnostic design supporting
different LLM backends.


A
B
PREVIEW
video
script
export
Analyze Q4 revenue peaks, regional marketing efficiency, and top pro...
C SCENE TIMELINE STRIP
0s
Total Revenue by Product... 54s-1:05
1:30
4
Total Revenue by Product (Q4 Performance)
bar chart ·
40s-52s
NARRATION
Finally, we look at total revenue to confirm our peak Q4 performance leaders.
grow bars ·
-- Bar chart entrance
grow bars
The Laptop Pro X remains the clear revenue leader.
pulse
-- Highlight Laptop Pro X
fade in
scale in
Product_name
Total_amount
sequential
Laptop Pro X
754320
ask AI
4K Monitor
269920
+ 3 more rows
D
Al Edit
Natural language
@Scene 4. change to tree
map and highlight top
product
Done. Scene 4 updated to 
treemap. Laptop Pro X 
highlighted in blue.
Which product has the 
highest Q3 to Q4 growth 
rate?
Analysis ·  7 steps. 
Done
4K Monitor: +52.5% 1
Runner-up: Laptop Pro X 
+52.2%
Add a new scene 
showing monthly 
revenue trend for the 
top 2 growth products
New scene generated
and inserted as Scene 8.
@Scene 4 · chart 
D1
CANVAS
MANIPULATION
Style Editing
D2
DATA-DRIVEN Q&A
Analysis · 7 steps
Done
Bound dataset:
Resolve DVSpec binding: columns
product_name
GROUP BY
product_name
SUM
2025, quarter ∈ {3, 4}
CONCLUSION
Highest Q3→Q4 revenue growth 
(2025): 4K

Monitor at +52.5% ($177K → $270K).
Runner-up: Laptop Pro X at +52.2% 
($496K → $754K).

Source:  sales with_products.csv  --
Data Q&A
D3
SCENE
GENERATION
Scene Generation
Conceptual roll-up (same logic as code):
, 
calendar_quarter(                       )
sale_date
→
(                            ); filter year = 
total_amount
Fig. 4. DATAMAGIC web interface, showing (A–D) the main UI components and (D1–D3) three key interaction flows.
5.3
Interactive System
Built upon the generation framework above, we implement DATAM-
AGIC as a complete web-based interactive system (Figure 4), developed
with React [35] and Remotion [38]. The core design goal is to support
human-in-the-loop refinement (DR4): users can inspect, understand,
and selectively refine the generated video through a shared declarative
DVSPEC state, without regenerating the entire video. DVSPEC orga-
nizes the video into self-contained scenes, allowing each interaction to
be localized to a target scene and resolved within it without disturbing
the rest of the video.
The interface consists of four functional areas: the Data & History
Panel (A) for dataset upload and history browsing; the Preview &
Script Area (B) offering video preview, structured DVSPEC view, and
export modes; the Scene Timeline & Narration Editor (C) for direct
narration and animation editing (with timing automatically re-aligned
via DVSPEC’s narration-indexed triggering); and the AI Edit Panel (D)
providing a natural language interface. We first describe the design
considerations and assumptions of the interactive system, and then the
three interaction modes.
Design Considerations and Assumptions. The interactive system
follows a principle of scoped refinement: each user request is interpreted
as an update with an explicit scope over DVSPEC, rather than an
uncontrolled rerun of the entire video-generation workflow. For within-
scene changes, such as adjustments to chart type, data bindings, style
parameters, narration, or animation triggers, the system updates the
relevant DVSPEC fields in the target scene and re-renders only that
scene, without rerunning the generation pipeline or automatically re-
orchestrating the global narrative. Requests to reorder scenes or perform
irreversible operations are first presented to the user for confirmation
rather than applied silently. Users can express such requests through
natural-language commands, structured script editing, or canvas actions;
the system maps them to scoped modifications without requiring direct
manipulation of the underlying grammar. By making the affected
state and cross-modal bindings explicit and controllable (DR4), the
system enables generated results to be refined in a predictable and
user-steerable manner.
Canvas Manipulation (D1). Users issue natural language instruc-
tions
(e.g.,
@Scene 4:
change to treemap and highlight
top product) or click directly on the canvas to modify chart styles
and data bindings. The system resolves such operations as a scoped
modification of the target scene with incremental re-rendering, with-
out full video regeneration; following the scoped-refinement principle
above, the modification is confined within that scene and does not affect
any other scene’s configuration.
Data-Driven Q&A (D2). Users can pose data queries about the
video content (e.g., “Which product has the highest Q3 to Q4 growth
rate?”). Rather than inferring answers from pixels, DATAMAGIC lever-
ages DVSPEC’s data provenance to enable structured queries. Specifi-
cally, the system first uses an LLM to parse the semantic intent of the
question, then locates relevant data binding fields in the current scene’s
DVSPEC configuration, constructs structured query operations (e.g.,
filtering, aggregation, extremum retrieval), and executes them directly
against the underlying tabular data. Results are returned with a full
reasoning trace that records the data columns, filter conditions, and ag-
gregation operations used, enabling verifiable and traceable responses.
Scene Generation (D3). Insights surfaced through Q&A can be
directly converted into new scenes (e.g., “Add a scene showing the
monthly revenue trend for the top 2 growth products”). The system
automatically generates the corresponding DVSPEC configuration and
inserts the new scene into the existing sequence, closing the loop from
data exploration to narrative extension and transforming the data video
from a one-way medium into an explorable interactive data interface.
6
EXPERIMENTS
6.1
Experimental Setup
Evaluation Datasets. We collected evaluation data from two repre-
sentative benchmarks: DAComp-DA [19] contains real enterprise data
from business scenarios such as sales and HR, while T2R-bench [74]
provides public statistics from 19 domains including environmental re-
sources and public management. We selected single-table datasets and
refined queries to suit video generation requirements. The final dataset
consists of 60 datasets (36 from T2R-bench, 24 from DAComp-DA)
with 109 samples. The data scale distribution includes small (<100
rows, 6 datasets), medium (100–1000 rows, 21 datasets), and large
(>1000 rows, 33 datasets, up to 150,000 rows). The queries cover trend
analysis, comparison, association, and distribution patterns. Detailed
statistics are provided in Appendix B.
Baselines. We establish two baseline categories: (1) Direct Genera-
tion, where GPT-5, Claude-Sonnet-4, Gemini-2.5-Pro, and DeepSeek-
V3.2 each generate complete Remotion rendering code, including chart
bindings, narration scripts, and animation configurations, through a
single inference call, without any intermediate representation or multi-


Table 1. End-to-End Video Generation Performance Comparison.
Evaluation Dimensions
Method
Exec Rate (%)
Intent
Insight
Narrative
Animation
Aesthetic
Avg. Score
Direct Generation Methods
DeepSeek-V3.2
48.62%
1.95
1.98
1.88
1.65
2.09
1.91
Gemini-2.5-Pro
66.06%
2.38
2.25
2.07
1.94
2.44
2.22
GPT-5
86.24%
2.36
2.22
2.05
1.84
2.17
2.13
Claude-Sonnet-4
84.40%
2.28
2.01
1.98
1.91
2.71
2.18
DATAMAGIC with Different Base Models
DATAMAGIC (DeepSeek-V3.2)
96.33%
3.21
2.95
3.16
4.05
3.84
3.44
DATAMAGIC (Gemini-2.5-Pro)
97.25%
3.28
3.17
3.56
3.89
3.44
3.47
DATAMAGIC (GPT-5)
95.41%
3.26
3.16
3.16
3.79
3.53
3.38
DATAMAGIC (Claude-Sonnet-4)
98.17%
3.79
3.37
3.84
4.39
4.05
3.89
Table 2. Ablation study of DATAMAGIC variants.
Variant
Intent
Insight
Narrative
Animation
Aesthetic
Avg. Score
DATAMAGIC (Full)
3.79
3.37
3.84
4.39
4.05
3.89
w/o Story Planner
3.42
3.16
3.26
3.79
3.58
3.44
w/o Orchestration
3.32
3.21
3.42
3.95
3.79
3.54
stage decomposition; (2) DATAMAGIC Variants, where the same
LLMs are integrated into our framework to verify model-agnosticism.
We exclude general video generators (e.g., Sora, Runway) as they can-
not ensure the numerical accuracy and logical traceability required for
data storytelling. Both direct generation baselines and DATAMAGIC
variants use identical retry policies.
Evaluation Metrics. We establish a two-tier evaluation framework:
(1) Coarse-grained metrics include Execution Rate (Exec Rate) to
assess system robustness; (2) Fine-grained metrics evaluate video
quality across five dimensions on a 1–5 scale: Intent, Insight, Narrative,
Animation, and Aesthetic [4,57,72]. We employ Gemini-2.5-Pro as an
automated evaluator. To validate its reliability, we performed stratified
sampling of 60 videos and invited 3 experts with data video research
backgrounds to independently score them using a unified rubric (1–
5 scale), with averaged expert scores as ground truth. Automated
scores exhibit strong positive correlation with expert scores overall
(Pearson r = 0.91, p < 0.001; MAE = 0.38), with all dimension-level
correlations exceeding 0.75. Detailed scoring prompts are provided in
Appendix D.1, and dimension-level consistency results together with
details of the expert-validation interface and procedure are provided in
Appendix E.
6.2
End-to-End Video Generation Performance
As shown in Table 1, DATAMAGIC significantly outperforms direct
generation methods across all evaluation dimensions, with consistent
improvements across different base models.
Quality Improvement. Direct generation methods achieve average
scores between 1.91 and 2.22; DATAMAGIC improves these to 3.38–
3.89. The two most significant gains are in Animation and Narrative.
Animation scores increase from an average of 1.84 to 4.03 (+120%):
direct generation methods lack structured audio-visual alignment mech-
anisms, causing animation triggers to frequently desynchronize from
narration content; DVSPEC’s narration-indexed triggering resolves
this at the declarative level. Narrative scores improve from 2.00 to
3.43 (+72%): without global narrative planning, direct generation pro-
duces scenes with logical discontinuities or information repetition; the
Generate-then-Orchestrate strategy substantially improves coherence
through global orchestration. Intent and Aesthetic dimensions also
improve by more than 50%, while Insight improves by 49.5%.
Execution Stability. Direct generation methods show high variance
in execution rates (48.62%–86.24%), as errors at any stage cause com-
plete generation failure. DATAMAGIC stabilizes execution rates above
95% through its decoupled design. Notably, DeepSeek-V3.2 improves
its execution rate from 48.62% to 96.33%, with its average score (3.44)
surpassing the best-performing direct generation model, validating the
framework’s model-agnosticism.
Efficiency Trade-off. Direct generation methods average approx-
imately 57 seconds, while DATAMAGIC’s two-stage process totals
approximately 176 seconds (60 seconds for configuration generation
and 116 seconds for video rendering with parallelism set to 3), which
can be further reduced by increasing parallelism. Although DATA-
MAGIC takes roughly three times longer, this results in significantly
higher execution rates (95%+ vs. 49%–86%) and quality (3.89 vs.
2.22), reflecting a deliberate trade-off of time for quality and robustness.
Training a dedicated data-video model offers a potential path to reduc-
ing this additional overhead and reliance on external APIs [25,68,72].
6.3
Ablation Study
To validate the effectiveness of key modules, we conducted ablation
experiments using Claude-Sonnet-4 as the base model. We ablate
the Story Planner and Orchestration module, the core designs that
distinguish DATAMAGIC from direct generation, while excluding the
Data Manager and Visual Designer, whose removal causes pipeline
failure rather than measurable quality degradation.
As shown in Table 2, removing the Story Planner reduces the av-
erage score from 3.89 to 3.44 (11.6% decrease), with Narrative and
Animation showing the most significant drops (15.1% and 13.7%).
This indicates that the Story Planner’s role goes beyond query decom-
position: without it, the system tends to generate candidate scenes
with limited analytical diversity, compressing the optimization space
available to the orchestration stage.
Removing the Orchestration module has a greater impact, reduc-
ing the average score to 3.54 (9.0% decrease). Intent is most affected
(12.4% decrease) and Narrative also drops significantly (10.9%), indi-
cating that without global orchestration the system degrades to greedy
scene-by-scene generation, making it difficult to ensure overall query
coverage and cross-scene logical coherence.
Notably, even without Orchestration, the Animation dimension main-
tains a relatively high score (3.95, only 10.0% decrease). This validates
the robustness of DVSPEC’s narration-indexed triggering: audio-visual
synchronization is guaranteed at the declarative level by DVSPEC and
does not depend on global orchestration. Together, the two ablations
confirm the necessity of both Generate-then-Orchestrate stages.
6.4
Error Pattern Analysis of Direct Generation
To understand why direct generation methods perform poorly on the
data video task, we systematically analyze their outputs and identify
three categories of core error patterns.
Visual Rendering Failures. This is the most severe error category,
representing a fundamental breakdown where the video stream degener-
ates into a prolonged pure-color background and no longer conveys any
data or narrative information. For instance, DeepSeek-V3.2’s output
turned completely white after 17 seconds. The root cause is execu-
tion failure in the code generation stage: rendering code produced by
the model contains syntax errors or runtime exceptions that prevent
visualization from being displayed.


Visualization Design Defects. Even when content is successfully
rendered, outputs frequently violate established visualization guide-
lines. The most prevalent issue is truncation and cropping: models
fail to adapt visual elements to canvas boundaries, causing titles or
axis labels to be cut off, as observed in GPT-5’s outputs. Element
overlap also occurs frequently, with text annotations or UI components
occluding critical data points in violation of the non-occlusion principle.
Additionally, models exhibit failed narrative animation: rather than
leveraging the temporal dimension of video to show trends or process
evolution, they revert to static images, reducing data storytelling to
decorative slideshows.
Audio-Visual Consistency Errors. The third category concerns
semantic and temporal misalignment between visual and auditory chan-
nels. A recurring issue is temporal misalignment: the narrator analyzes
a trend while the screen remains black or lags on the previous scene,
producing a “blind narration” effect observed in Gemini-2.5-Pro’s out-
puts. The root cause is that direct generation methods lack explicit
audio-visual binding mechanisms: narration and visual content are
generated in a single inference pass, but the model cannot precisely
control their temporal correspondence. DATAMAGIC eliminates this
problem by design through DVSPEC’s declarative triggering.
These three error patterns share a common underlying cause: end-
to-end data video generation requires cross-modal coordination that
exceeds the capability of current LLMs in a single inference pass. Ap-
pendix A provides qualitative case studies, covering a cross-method
comparison of these error patterns (Appendix A.1), high-quality DATA-
MAGIC generations (Appendix A.2), and low-quality examples that
analyze typical failure cases (Appendix A.3).
7
USER STUDY
To evaluate the practical utility of DATAMAGIC in real-world data video
creation workflows, we conducted a within-subjects user study follow-
ing the evaluation paradigm of recent HCI system research [41,64]. The
study had two evaluation goals: first, to assess whether DATAMAGIC
improves video creation efficiency and reduces cognitive load relative
to a conversational LLM workflow; and second, to understand how
users perceive its usability and interactive editing capabilities.
7.1
Study Design
Conditions. Each participant completed one task under each of two
conditions, with condition order counterbalanced: (1) DATAMAGIC:
participants used the web-based system proposed in this paper, trigger-
ing the multi-agent generation pipeline via a natural language query
and iteratively editing the output using the three interaction modes
described in Section 5; (2) Conversational LLM workflow (baseline):
participants used the same underlying LLM (Claude Sonnet 4.5) to
perform data analysis, narration scripting, and visualization code gen-
eration through multi-turn dialogue, then rendered the video using a
pre-configured Remotion environment. We chose this baseline over
existing authoring tools (e.g., DataClips [2], Data Player [47]), which
require pre-prepared visualizations and thus cannot support our end-to-
end, raw-data-to-video evaluation setting. The baseline shares the same
technology stack as DATAMAGIC (Claude Sonnet 4.5 and Remotion);
the key difference is the absence of DVSPEC’s structural constraints
and the multi-agent orchestration layer, requiring participants to coor-
dinate each step manually and manage audio-visual synchronization
by hand. Both conditions had a 40-minute target duration to simulate a
time-pressured creation environment [64]. Participants who exceeded
this target duration were allowed to continue until completion, and their
actual completion times were recorded.
Participants. We recruited 12 participants (5 male, 7 female; aged
21–29) through an open call at a local university (P1–P12). Participants
were Master’s or junior Ph.D. students from diverse fields (computer
science, data science, finance, business analytics), all with data analysis
experience. Based on self-reported experience with data video creation,
we divided them into two groups: 6 novices with limited experience in
video editing or data storytelling, and 6 experts with prior experience
creating data visualizations or videos. All participants were fluent in
English and provided written informed consent before participating
in the study. The study was approved by the HKUST Human and
Artefacts Research Ethics Committee (No. HKUST(GZ)-HSP-2026-
0196). Upon completion, each participant received cash compensation
equivalent to USD 10 for their time.
Tasks. To cover representative data video scenarios and enhance
ecological validity, we designed three types of narrative tasks: (1) At-
tribution: explain the key drivers behind a metric change; (2) Evolu-
tion: analyze temporal trends and inflection points in a time series;
(3) Comparison: evaluate differences across multiple entities on var-
ious dimensions. Each participant was assigned different task types
across the two rounds. Every task covered the full creation workflow,
including data analysis, visualization design, narration writing, and
animation configuration, and required at least one editing operation to
assess interactive editing capability.
Ordering and Procedure. We used a Balanced Latin Square design
to ensure that task type, condition, and presentation order were evenly
distributed across participants, with expertise level and condition order
counterbalanced within each group. Each session lasted approximately
90–110 minutes and consisted of four phases: (1) introduction and
training (∼10 min); (2) first trial (40-min target duration) followed
immediately by post-condition questionnaires; (3) second trial under
the other condition and task type; (4) semi-structured interview (∼10
min).
Measures. We collected three types of data: (1) Objective: task
completion time per condition; (2) Subjective: the Raw NASA-TLX to
assess perceived cognitive load, and the System Usability Scale (SUS)
item set to assess perceived usability, both administered on a 7-point
Likert scale immediately after each trial to minimize recall bias; after
reverse-coding negatively worded items, we report the mean per-item
usability rating across the ten SUS items (1–7, higher is better), rather
than the canonical 0–100 SUS composite; (3) Task-specific feedback:
a custom 5-item, 7-point Likert questionnaire covering visual quality
(Q1), animation effectiveness (Q2), narrative coherence (Q3), control-
lability (Q4), and overall satisfaction (Q5). As questionnaire data did
not satisfy normality assumptions, all subjective measures were ana-
lyzed using Wilcoxon signed-rank tests, with effect sizes reported as
r = z/
√
N (N = 12).
7.2
Quantitative Results
Overall, DATAMAGIC shows significant gains in task time, perceived
usability, and most workload dimensions, providing converging evi-
dence for both evaluation goals.
Task Completion Time. As shown in Figure 5(1), DATAMAGIC
significantly reduced task completion time (Wilcoxon z = −3.06, p <
.001, r = 0.88). Average completion time decreased from 39.2 minutes
under the baseline to 8.0 minutes with DATAMAGIC, an improvement
of approximately 79.7%. Notably, 7 participants (58.3%) exceeded the
40-minute target duration under the baseline condition, while all 12
participants completed the DATAMAGIC condition within the target
duration, indicating more predictable task completion.
System Usability. Using the SUS item set administered on a 7-point
Likert scale, with negatively worded items reverse-coded, DATAMAGIC
achieved a significantly higher mean per-item usability rating (M =
5.97, SD = 0.35) than the baseline (M = 3.22, SD = 0.91; p < .001).
Ratings range from 1 to 7, with higher values indicating better perceived
usability for the authoring workflow.
Cognitive Load. As shown in Figure 5(2), DATAMAGIC signifi-
cantly reduced perceived load on five of the six NASA-TLX dimensions
(Mental Demand, Physical Demand, Temporal Demand, Effort, and
Frustration; all p < .001), while Performance showed no significant
difference (p = .34), indicating that the reduction in workload was not
accompanied by a detectable difference in participants’ self-rated task
performance between conditions.
Task-Specific Feedback. DATAMAGIC outperformed the baseline
on all five Likert dimensions. The largest gaps were in narrative co-
herence (6.6 vs. 2.8) and animation effectiveness (6.3 vs. 3.0), directly
corroborating the quantitative improvements in Animation and Nar-
rative reported in Section 6. Visual quality also showed a substantial
gap (6.3 vs. 3.2), and overall satisfaction was significantly higher (6.4


Overall
0
20
40
Time (min)
(1) Time
***
Mental
Demand
Physical
Demand
Temporal
Demand
Performance
Effort
Frustration
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
Score (1-7)
(2) NASA-TLX
***
***
***
***
***
DataMagic
Baseline
Fig. 5. User-study results (N = 12). DATAMAGIC reduced task time from 39.2 to 8.0 min (79.7%) and lowered ratings on five NASA-TLX workload
dimensions, with no significant Performance difference. Error bars: 95% CIs; Wilcoxon signed-rank tests: ∗p < .05, ∗∗p < .01, ∗∗∗p < .001.
vs. 3.2). The controllability dimension showed the smallest differ-
ence (6.2 vs. 3.7), as the baseline’s multi-turn dialogue itself provides
considerable interaction flexibility.
7.3
Qualitative Feedback
Interview feedback revealed four themes consistent with the quantita-
tive results.
End-to-end automation eliminates workflow fragmentation. Un-
der the baseline, each step required a separate dialogue round with
manual handoff to the next. P3 noted: “It took me several rounds
of chatting to get a usable chart, but then for narration and anima-
tion I had to start all over again.” P7 similarly found that modifying
chart data bindings required tediously re-synchronizing narration and
animation by hand.
Audio-visual synchronization becomes automatic. Multiple par-
ticipants (P2, P5, P7, P9) identified timeline alignment as the most
difficult aspect of the baseline. DVSPEC’s narration-indexed triggering
was seen as fundamentally resolving this. P9 noted: “The narration
and animation just naturally fit together—I didn’t have to align the
timing myself.”
Interactive editing is effective and alleviates trust concerns about
automation. In the DATAMAGIC condition, each participant completed
at least one intended edit; all 12 successfully applied their requested
changes within the target scene without disturbing the rest of the video.
This editability also reshaped attitudes toward automation: participants
(P1, P4, P10) initially had reservations about automated outputs, but
the three interaction modes effectively resolved their concerns. P11
commented: “Knowing I can still go in and adjust things actually
made me more comfortable letting it generate automatically.” Novices
preferred natural language commands while experts favored direct
script editing, confirming that the modes accommodate different user
experience levels.
Suggestions for improvement. Participants suggested a scene tem-
plate library (P6) and support for brand visual guidelines in export
(P12), providing directions for future iterations.
8
DISCUSSION
Expressiveness and practical scope. Although DVSPEC organizes
charts, narration, animation, and scene structure within a unified speci-
fication, DATAMAGIC is designed to be extensible beyond its current
set of chart and narrative forms. Its practical expressive range is jointly
determined by the visual vocabulary implemented by the rendering
engine and the analytical capabilities of the underlying models. Both
layers can evolve: new visual forms can be incorporated by extending
the rendering components, while stronger models can support more
complex analyses. DATAMAGIC’s practical expressiveness can there-
fore grow as these layers improve, while DVSPEC remains a stable
core abstraction. This design helps preserve reliable chart rendering
and traceability of visualized values to source data, while leaving room
for future capability expansion.
Designing for user intervention. Fully automated generation can-
not always anticipate users’ analytical focus, visual style, or narration
tone. DATAMAGIC therefore exposes DVSPEC as a shared, inspectable
state rather than treating generation as a black box, enabling refinement
through natural-language commands, structured script editing, and can-
vas actions. We adopt scoped refinement: an edit updates only the
relevant fields of its target scene and re-renders that scene, preserving
cross-modal bindings without rerunning the full pipeline or silently
altering user-authored decisions in other scenes. Because DVSPEC
separates logical description from rendering implementation, these
updates remain renderer-agnostic while keeping the specification and
rendered output synchronized. This intervention, however, still occurs
after generation. A promising next step is to present the analysis plan
before full synthesis so users can confirm or adjust early decisions
about analytical direction or audience framing before they propagate
through the video.
Balancing animation reliability and creative diversity. DATAM-
AGIC uses structured animation patterns in the agent prompts, such
as entrance effects and narration-triggered emphasis effects, to keep
animations aligned with chart semantics and synchronized with the
narration. This keeps the animation stable, legible, and in service of
the data narrative. The same reliability, however, comes at the cost of
diversity: the guidelines steer the system toward a conservative mo-
tion language and may suppress the more expressive animations an
unconstrained model might attempt. Guideline-free prompting could
yield more creative videos, but at present it would make legibility, pac-
ing, and alignment with the narration harder to control consistently. A
promising direction is to treat the guidelines as soft constraints that a
model may depart from when it can justify the outcome, or to learn
animation styles from curated exemplars.
Limitations and future work. The discussion so far has centered
on DATAMAGIC’s capabilities and design trade-offs; beyond these, the
system has several concrete limitations, each pointing to a clear future
direction. On the data side, DATAMAGIC targets single-table inputs,
which already cover most data-storytelling scenarios; supporting multi-
table joins and richer relational data would broaden its applicability.
On the visual side, integrating image-generation models could supply
non-data assets such as custom illustrations and further enrich the visu-
als. On evaluation, the data-video field still lacks a commonly accepted
benchmark; building public benchmarks for reproducible cross-system
comparison is an important step for the area as a whole. On rendering,
DATAMAGIC currently binds DVSPEC to a single renderer; generaliz-
ing specification–rendering synchronization across different backends
would let the renderer-agnostic specification drive diverse renderers
and support rendering-specific edits.
9
CONCLUSION
This paper presents DATAMAGIC, an end-to-end system that generates
data videos from raw tabular data through declarative multi-agent or-
chestration. DVSPEC provides a shared state for agent collaboration
and user editing while organizing charts, narration, and animation; the
“Generate-then-Orchestrate” strategy decouples local scene generation
from global narrative organization. Quantitative evaluations show that,
compared with direct generation baselines, DATAMAGIC improves
video quality and execution stability; the user study further shows that
it increases authoring efficiency and reduces cognitive load. These
results suggest that declarative representations can serve not only as
output descriptions but also as an intermediate layer coordinating au-
tomated generation, data traceability, and fine-grained human control,
thereby supporting structured and controllable authoring workflows.


ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
This paper was supported by the National Science and Technology
Major Project (2025ZD0619402); the NSF of China (62402409); Youth
S&T Talent Support Programme of Guangdong Provincial Association
for Science and Technology (SKXRC2025461); the Young Talent Sup-
port Project of Guangzhou Association for Science and Technology
(QT-2025-001); Guangzhou Basic and Applied Basic Research Foun-
dation (2026A1515010269, 2025A04J3935, 2023A1515110545); and
Guangzhou-HKUST(GZ) Joint Funding Program (2025A03J3714).
SUPPLEMENTAL MATERIALS
The supplemental materials include an appendix with qualitative
cases, dataset statistics, agent prompts, evaluation criteria, and expert-
validation procedures; a system demonstration video showing the end-
to-end data-video authoring and interactive refinement workflow; and
representative generated outputs that illustrate the quality and diversity
of DATAMAGIC across different datasets and queries.
REFERENCES
[1] F. Amini, N. Henry Riche, B. Lee, C. Hurter, and P. Irani. Understanding
data videos: Looking at narrative visualization through the cinematography
lens. In Proc. CHI, pp. 1459–1468. ACM, New York, 2015. doi: 10.1145/
2702123.2702431 1, 2, 3, 4, 5
[2] F. Amini, N. H. Riche, B. Lee, A. Monroy-Hernandez, and P. Irani. Author-
ing data-driven videos with DataClips. IEEE Trans. Vis. Comput. Graph.,
23(1):501–510, 2017. doi: 10.1109/TVCG.2016.2598647 2, 8
[3] G. Aodeng, G. Li, Y. Feng, Q. Chen, Y. Zhang, and C. H. Liu. InRe-
AcTable: LLM-powered interactive visual data story construction from
tabular data. In Proc. UIST, pp. 139:1–139:16. ACM, New York, 2025.
doi: 10.1145/3746059.3747719 2
[4] Y. Bian, X. Lin, Y. Xie, T. Liu, M. Zhuge, S. Lu et al. You don’t know until
you click:automated gui testing for production-ready software evaluation.
arXiv preprint arXiv:2508.14104, 2025. doi: 10.48550/arXiv.2508.14104
7
[5] M. Bostock, V. Ogievetsky, and J. Heer. D3: Data-driven documents.
IEEE Trans. Vis. Comput. Graph., 17(12):2301–2309, 2011. doi: 10.1109/
TVCG.2011.185 2, 3
[6] Q. Chen, S. Cao, J. Wang, and N. Cao. How does automation shape
the process of narrative visualization: A survey of tools. IEEE Trans.
Vis. Comput. Graph., 30(8):4429–4448, 2024. doi: 10.1109/TVCG.2023.
3261320 2
[7] Y. Chen, Y. Wu, S. Shen, Y. Xie, L. Shen, H. Xiong et al. Chartmark:
A structured grammar for chart annotation. In Proceedings of the IEEE
Visualization Conference, pp. 311–315. IEEE, Piscataway, 2025. doi: 10.
1109/VIS60296.2025.00068 2
[8] Z.-t. Chen, S. Ye, X. Chu, H. Xia, H. Zhang, H. Qu et al. Augmenting
sports videos with viscommentator. IEEE Trans. Vis. Comput. Graph.,
28(1):824–834, 2022. doi: 10.1109/TVCG.2021.3114806 2
[9] H. Cheng, J. Wang, Y. Wang, B. Lee, H. Zhang, and D. Zhang. Investi-
gating the role and interplay of narrations and animations in data videos.
Comput. Graph. Forum, 41(3):527–539, 2022. doi: 10.1111/cgf.14560 2
[10] T. Ge, B. Lee, and Y. Wang. CAST: Authoring data-driven chart anima-
tions. In Proc. CHI, pp. 24:1–24:15. ACM, New York, 2021. doi: 10.
1145/3411764.3445452 2
[11] T. Ge, Y. Zhao, B. Lee, D. Ren, B. Chen, and Y. Wang. Canis: A high-
level language for data-driven chart animations. Comput. Graph. Forum,
39(3):607–617, 2020. doi: 10.1111/cgf.14005 2, 3
[12] Google
DeepMind.
Veo
3.
https://deepmind.google/
technologies/veo/, 2025. Accessed: 2026. 1
[13] Y. He, K. Xu, S. Cao, Y. Shi, Q. Chen, and N. Cao. Leveraging foundation
models for crafting narrative visualization: A survey. IEEE Trans. Vis.
Comput. Graph., 31(10):9303–9323, 2025. doi: 10.1109/TVCG.2025.
3542504 2
[14] S. Hong, Y. Lin, B. Liu, B. Liu, B. Wu, C. Zhang et al. Data interpreter:
An LLM agent for data science. In Findings of Proc. ACL, pp. 19796–
19821. Association for Computational Linguistics, Vienna, 2025. doi: 10.
18653/v1/2025.findings-acl.1016 4
[15] M. S. Islam, M. T. R. Laskar, M. R. Parvez, E. Hoque, and S. Joty. Data-
Narrative: Automated data-driven storytelling with visualizations and
texts. In Proc. EMNLP, pp. 19253–19286. Association for Computational
Linguistics, Miami, 2024. doi: 10.18653/v1/2024.emnlp-main.1073 2
[16] Y. Kim and J. Heer. Gemini: A grammar and recommender system for
animated transitions in statistical graphics. IEEE Trans. Vis. Comput.
Graph., 27(2):485–494, 2021. doi: 10.1109/TVCG.2020.3030360 2
[17] Y. Kim and J. Heer. Gemini2: Generating keyframe-oriented animated
transitions between statistical graphics. In Proc. IEEE VIS, pp. 201–205.
IEEE, Piscataway, 2021. doi: 10.1109/VIS49827.2021.9623291 2
[18] X. Lan, Y. Shi, Y. Wu, X. Jiao, and N. Cao. Kineticharts: Augmenting
affective expressiveness of charts in data stories with animation design.
IEEE Trans. Vis. Comput. Graph., 28(1):933–943, 2022. doi: 10.1109/
TVCG.2021.3114775 2
[19] F. Lei, J. Meng, Y. Huang, J. Zhao, Y. Zhang, J. Luo et al. DAComp:
Benchmarking data agents across the full data intelligence lifecycle. arXiv
preprint arXiv:2512.04324, 2025. doi: 10.48550/ARXIV.2512.04324 6,
12
[20] B. Li, Z. Liang, Y. Xie, X. Lin, T. Luo, X. Liu et al.
DataSpace:
Benchmarking data agents for verifiable analytics over heterogeneous
workspaces. arXiv preprint arXiv:2608.03451, 2026. doi: 10.48550/arXiv
.2608.03451 4
[21] B. Li, Y. Luo, C. Chai, G. Li, and N. Tang. The dawn of natural language
to SQL: Are we fully ready? Proc. VLDB Endow., 17(11):3318–3331,
2024. doi: 10.14778/3681954.3682003 3
[22] B. Li, Y. Peng, Y. Xie, S. Lu, Y. Zhu, X. Mu et al. Deepeye: A steerable
self-driving data agent system. In Companion of the International Confer-
ence on Management of Data, pp. 74–77. ACM, New York, 2026. doi: 10.
1145/3788853.3801612 1
[23] B. Li, Y. Peng, Y. Xie, S. Lu, Y. Zhu, X. Mu et al. DeepEye: A workflow-
centric agentic data system for steerable data analytics. In Proceedings
of the 1st International Workshop on Agentic Data Systems and the 3rd
International Workshop on Data-Centric AI (ADS/DATAI), co-located with
VLDB, 2026. 4
[24] G. Li, R. Li, Y. Feng, Y. Zhang, Y. Luo, and C. H. Liu. CoInsight: Visual
storytelling for hierarchical tables with connected insights. IEEE Trans.
Vis. Comput. Graph., 30(6):3049–3061, 2024. doi: 10.1109/TVCG.2024.
3388553 2
[25] X. Lin, Y. Qi, Y. Zhu, T. Palpanas, C. Chai, N. Tang et al. LEAD: Iterative
data selection for efficient LLM instruction tuning. Proc. VLDB Endow.,
19(3):426–439, 2025. doi: 10.14778/3778092.3778103 7
[26] Y. Liu, K. Zhang, Y. Li, Z. Yan, C. Gao, R. Chen et al. Sora: A review
on background, technology, limitations, and opportunities of large vision
models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2402.17177, 2024. doi: 10.48550/ARXIV.
2402.17177 1
[27] T. Luo, C. Huang, L. Shen, B. Li, S. Shen, W. Zeng et al. nvBench 2.0:
Resolving ambiguity in text-to-visualization through stepwise reasoning.
In Proc. NeurIPS, vol. 38, pp. 138749–138786. Curran Associates, Inc.,
Red Hook, 2025. doi: 10.52202/085713-4172 4
[28] Y. Luo, C. Chai, X. Qin, N. Tang, and G. Li. Interactive cleaning for
progressive visualization through composite questions. In Proc. ICDE, pp.
733–744. IEEE, Dallas, 2020. doi: 10.1109/ICDE48307.2020.00069 3
[29] Y. Luo, C. Chai, X. Qin, N. Tang, and G. Li. VisClean: Interactive cleaning
for progressive visualization. Proc. VLDB Endow., 13(12):2821–2824,
2020. doi: 10.14778/3415478.3415484 3
[30] Y. Luo, X. Qin, C. Chai, N. Tang, G. Li, and W. Li. Steerable self-
driving data visualization. IEEE Transactions on Knowledge and Data
Engineering, 34(1):475–490, 2022. doi: 10.1109/TKDE.2020.2981464 1
[31] Y. Luo, X. Qin, N. Tang, and G. Li. Deepeye: Towards automatic data
visualization. In IEEE International Conference on Data Engineering, pp.
101–112. IEEE, Piscataway, 2018. doi: 10.1109/ICDE.2018.00019 1
[32] Y. Luo, X. Qin, Y. Xie, and G. Li. Intelligent data visualization analysis
techniques: A survey. Journal of Software, 35(1):356–404, 2024. doi: 10.
13328/j.cnki.jos.006911 2
[33] Y. Luo, N. Tang, G. Li, C. Chai, W. Li, and X. Qin. Synthesizing natural
language to visualization (NL2VIS) benchmarks from NL2SQL bench-
marks. In Proc. SIGMOD, pp. 1235–1247. ACM, New York, 2021. doi:
10.1145/3448016.3457261 4
[34] Y. Luo, N. Tang, G. Li, J. Tang, C. Chai, and X. Qin. Natural language
to visualization by neural machine translation. IEEE Trans. Vis. Comput.
Graph., 28(1):217–226, 2022. doi: 10.1109/TVCG.2021.3114848 4
[35] Meta. React. https://react.dev/, 2026. Accessed: 2026. 6
[36] Microsoft. Azure TTS. https://azure.microsoft.com/services/
cognitive-services/text-to-speech, 2026. Accessed: 2026. 3, 4,
5
[37] X. Qin, Y. Luo, N. Tang, and G. Li. Making data visualization more
efficient and effective: A survey. The VLDB Journal, 29(1):93–117, 2020.


doi: 10.1007/s00778-019-00588-3 4
[38] Remotion. Remotion. https://www.remotion.dev/, 2026. Accessed:
2026. 6
[39] A. Satyanarayan, D. Moritz, K. Wongsuphasawat, and J. Heer. Vega-Lite:
A grammar of interactive graphics. IEEE Trans. Vis. Comput. Graph.,
23(1):341–350, 2017. doi: 10.1109/TVCG.2016.2599030 2, 3
[40] Z. Shao, L. Shen, H. Li, Y. Shan, H. Qu, Y. Wang et al. Narrative player:
Reviving data narratives with visuals. IEEE Trans. Vis. Comput. Graph.,
31(10):6781–6795, 2025. doi: 10.1109/TVCG.2025.3530512 2
[41] L. Shen, H. Li, Y. Wang, T. Luo, Y. Luo, and H. Qu. Data playwright:
Authoring data videos with annotated narration. IEEE Trans. Vis. Comput.
Graph., 31(9):5884–5897, 2025. doi: 10.1109/TVCG.2024.3477926 1, 2,
3, 8
[42] L. Shen, H. Li, Y. Wang, and H. Qu. From data to story: Towards automatic
animated data video creation with llm-based multi-agent systems. In IEEE
VIS Workshop on Data Storytelling in an Era of Generative AI (GEN4DS),
pp. 20–27. IEEE, Piscataway, 2024. doi: 10.1109/GEN4DS63889.2024.
00008 2
[43] L. Shen, H. Li, Y. Wang, and H. Qu. Reflecting on design paradigms of
animated data video tools. In Proc. CHI, pp. 190:1–190:21. ACM, New
York, 2025. doi: 10.1145/3706598.3713449 1, 2, 3
[44] L. Shen, E. Shen, Y. Luo, X. Yang, X. Hu, X. Zhang et al. Towards
natural language interfaces for data visualization: A survey. IEEE Trans.
Vis. Comput. Graph., 29(6):3121–3144, 2023. doi: 10.1109/TVCG.2022.
3148007 1
[45] L. Shen, E. Shen, Z. Tai, Y. Wang, Y. Luo, and J. Wang. GALVIS: Visual-
ization construction through example-powered declarative programming.
In Proceedings of the 31st ACM International Conference on Information
& Knowledge Management, pp. 4975–4979. ACM, New York, 2022. doi:
10.1145/3511808.3557159 2
[46] L. Shen, L. Yang, H. Li, Y. Wang, Y. Luo, and H. Qu. How does empirical
research facilitate creation tool design? A data video perspective. arXiv
preprint arXiv:2507.15244, 2025. doi: 10.48550/ARXIV.2507.15244 2
[47] L. Shen, Y. Zhang, H. Zhang, and Y. Wang. Data player: Automatic
generation of data videos with narration-animation interplay. IEEE Trans.
Vis. Comput. Graph., 30(1):109–119, 2024. doi: 10.1109/TVCG.2023.
3327197 2, 3, 8
[48] S. Shen, S. Lu, L. Shen, and Y. Luo. Debugging defective visualizations:
Empirical insights informing a human-ai Co-Debugging system. In Proc.
CHI, pp. 889:1–889:24. ACM, New York, 2026. doi: 10.1145/3772318.
3791441 3
[49] Y. Shen, Y. Zhao, Y. Wang, T. Ge, H. Shi, and B. Lee.
Authoring
data-driven chart animations through direct manipulation. IEEE Trans.
Vis. Comput. Graph., 31(2):1613–1630, 2025. doi: 10.1109/TVCG.2024.
3491504 2
[50] D. Shi, F. Sun, X. Xu, X. Lan, D. Gotz, and N. Cao. AutoClips: An
automatic approach to video generation from data facts. Comput. Graph.
Forum, 40(3):495–505, 2021. doi: 10.1111/cgf.14324 2
[51] D. Shi, X. Xu, F. Sun, Y. Shi, and N. Cao. Calliope: Automatic visual data
story generation from a spreadsheet. IEEE Trans. Vis. Comput. Graph.,
27(2):453–463, 2021. doi: 10.1109/TVCG.2020.3030403 2
[52] Y. Shi, X. Lan, J. Li, Z. Li, and N. Cao. Communicating with motion:
A design space for animated visual narratives in data videos. In Proc.
CHI, pp. 605:1–605:13. ACM, New York, 2021. doi: 10.1145/3411764.
3445337 2
[53] Y. Shi, B. Li, Y. Luo, L. Chen, and N. Tang. Augmenting realistic charts
with virtual overlays. In Proc. CHI, pp. 619:1–619:23. ACM, New York,
2025. doi: 10.1145/3706598.3714320 3
[54] Z. Shuai, B. Li, S. Yan, Y. Luo, and W. Yang. DeepVIS: Bridging natural
language and data visualization through step-wise reasoning. IEEE Trans.
Vis. Comput. Graph., 32(1):868–878, 2026. doi: 10.1109/TVCG.2025.
3634645 1
[55] X. Su, P. Dong, Z. Tang, S. Tang, Y. Zhai, K. Lin et al. VCG-Bench:
Towards a unified visual-centric benchmark for structured generation and
editing. arXiv preprint arXiv:2605.15677, 2026. doi: 10.48550/arXiv.
2605.15677 3
[56] M. Sun, L. Cai, W. Cui, Y. Wu, Y. Shi, and N. Cao. Erato: Cooperative
data story editing via fact interpolation. IEEE Trans. Vis. Comput. Graph.,
29(1):983–993, 2023. doi: 10.1109/TVCG.2022.3209428 2
[57] Y. Tang, X. Liu, B. Zhang, T. Lan, Y. Xie, J. Lao et al. IGenBench:
Benchmarking the reliability of text-to-infographic generation. arXiv
preprint arXiv:2601.04498, 2026. doi: 10.48550/ARXIV.2601.04498 7
[58] Y. Tang, Y. Xie, Y. Feng, T. Lan, and W. Chen. Demonstrating ViviDoc:
Generating interactive documents through human-agent collaboration. In
Proc. ACL, pp. 804–811. Association for Computational Linguistics, San
Diego, 2026. doi: 10.18653/v1/2026.acl-demo.79 3
[59] Y. Tang, Y. Xie, Y. Feng, T. Lan, J. Lao, and W. Chen. sketch-plot:
Progressive editing for Text-to-Image academic figures. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2606.09171, 2026. doi: 10.48550/arXiv.2606.09171 3
[60] Y. Tang, Y. Xie, Y. Feng, J. Lao, T. Lan, and W. Chen. Demonstrating
chart-plot: Closing the last mile of academic chart generation. arXiv
preprint arXiv:2606.09174, 2026. doi: 10.48550/arXiv.2606.09174 3
[61] J. Thompson, Z. Liu, W. Li, and J. Stasko. Understanding the design space
and authoring paradigms for animated data graphics. Comput. Graph.
Forum, 39(3):207–218, 2020. doi: 10.1111/CGF.13974 2
[62] J. R. Thompson, Z. Liu, and J. Stasko. Data animator: Authoring expres-
sive animated data graphics. In Proc. CHI, pp. 15:1–15:18. ACM, New
York, 2021. doi: 10.1145/3411764.3445747 2
[63] L. Wang, Z. Wang, S. Xiao, L. Liu, F. Tsung, and W. Zeng. VizTA: En-
hancing comprehension of distributional visualization with visual-lexical
fused conversational interface. Comput. Graph. Forum, 44(3):e70110,
2025. doi: 10.1111/cgf.70110 2
[64] L. Wang, Z. Zhang, Y. Cao, F. Tsung, and Y. Luo. Tabletale: Reviving the
narrative interplay between data tables and text in scientific papers. In Proc.
CHI, pp. 329:1–329:17. ACM, New York, 2026. doi: 10.1145/3772318.
3791534 8
[65] Y. Wang, Y. Gao, R. Huang, W. Cui, H. Zhang, and D. Zhang. Animated
presentation of static infographics with infomotion.
Comput. Graph.
Forum, 40(3):507–518, 2021. doi: 10.1111/cgf.14325 2
[66] Y. Wang, L. Shen, Z. You, X. Shu, B. Lee, J. Thompson et al. Wonderflow:
Narration-centric design of animated data videos. IEEE Trans. Vis. Comput.
Graph., 31(9):4638–4654, 2025. doi: 10.1109/TVCG.2024.3411575 1, 2
[67] Y. Wang, Z. Sun, H. Zhang, W. Cui, K. Xu, X. Ma et al. DataShot: Auto-
matic generation of fact sheets from tabular data. IEEE Trans. Vis. Comput.
Graph., 26(1):895–905, 2020. doi: 10.1109/TVCG.2019.2934398 2
[68] Y. Wu, Y. Peng, Y. Chen, J. Ruan, Z. Zhuang, C. Yang et al. AutoWeb-
World: Synthesizing infinite verifiable web environments via finite state
machines. arXiv preprint arXiv:2602.14296, 2026. doi: 10.48550/arXiv.
2602.14296 7
[69] Y. Wu, L. Yan, L. Shen, Y. Wang, N. Tang, and Y. Luo. ChartInsights: Eval-
uating multimodal large language models for Low-Level chart question
answering. In Findings of Proc. EMNLP, pp. 12174–12200. Associa-
tion for Computational Linguistics, Miami, 2024. doi: 10.18653/v1/2024.
findings-emnlp.710 3
[70] Y. Xie, Y. Luo, G. Li, and N. Tang. HAIChart: Human and AI paired
visualization system. Proc. VLDB Endow., 17(11):3178–3191, 2024. doi:
10.14778/3681954.3681992 1
[71] Y. Xie, C. Ma, Z. Wang, L. Wang, J. Zhu, C. Zeng et al.
DataM-
agic: Transforming tabular data into data insight video. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2606.20388, 2026. doi: 10.48550/arXiv.2606.20388 2
[72] Y. Xie, Z. Zhang, Y. Wu, S. Lu, J. Zhang, Z. Yu et al.
Visjudge-
bench: Aesthetics and quality assessment of visualizations. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2510.22373, 2025. doi: 10.48550/ARXIV.2510.22373 7
[73] L. Yang, X. Xu, X. Lan, Z. Liu, S. Guo, Y. Shi et al. A design space
for applying the freytag’s pyramid structure to data stories. IEEE Trans.
Vis. Comput. Graph., 28(1):922–932, 2022. doi: 10.1109/TVCG.2021.
3114774 2, 3, 5
[74] J. Zhang, C. Pan, K. Wei, S. Xiong, Y. Zhao, X. Li et al. T2R-bench: A
benchmark for generating article-level reports from real world industrial
tables. arXiv preprint arXiv:2508.19813, 2025. doi: 10.48550/ARXIV.
2508.19813 6, 12
[75] Z. Zhang, Z. Liang, J. Chen, H. Wang, and N. Tang.
Document-to-
database: Extraction meets relational semantics. Proc. VLDB Endow.,
19(9):2522–2535, 2026. doi: 10.14778/3819518.3819568 4
[76] Z. Zhang, Z. Liang, H. Wang, and N. Tang. DataMosaic: An interactive
demonstration of constraint-driven document-to-database construction.
Proc. VLDB Endow., 19(12):4570–4573, 2026. doi: 10.14778/3827998.
3828068 4
[77] J. Zong, J. Pollock, D. Wootton, and A. Satyanarayan. Animated Vega-
Lite: Unifying animation with a grammar of interactive graphics. IEEE
Trans. Vis. Comput. Graph., 29(1):149–159, 2023. doi: 10.1109/TVCG.
2022.3209369 2


A
CASE STUDIES
This appendix presents representative qualitative cases for DATAM-
AGIC and direct-generation baselines, covering cross-method com-
parisons, high-quality generations, and failure-mode analyses across
complex data storytelling scenarios such as agriculture, environmental
science, business analytics, energy, and gender-based compensation.
A.1
Cross-Method Comparison
Comparative Case. As shown in Figure 6, using the same input condi-
tions (Q4 2025 revenue analysis query and transaction dataset), direct
generation methods frequently exhibit all three error categories: empty
scenes or missing charts (visual rendering failures), visual element
overlap (design defects), and narration–visual content or timing mis-
matches (audio-visual errors). In contrast, DATAMAGIC generates
well-structured videos with precise audio-visual alignment, achieving
an average score of 4.2 (vs. 1.5 for direct generation) with consistent
improvements across all evaluation dimensions.
A.2
High-Quality Generations
Representative Agriculture Case. Figure 7 presents a representative
high-quality generation on a real-world agriculture dataset (overall
score: 4.6). Given the query “Evaluate the relationship between di-
verse irrigation techniques and wheat productivity throughout Punjab,
with particular attention to crop residue management practices and
their economic repercussions,” DATAMAGIC constructs a coherent four-
scene narrative: an overview introduction, followed by wheat-yield
comparisons across irrigation methods (0’08s), residue-disposal dis-
tributions (0’30s), and industry-level price disparities (0’48s). Within
the residue-disposal scene, when the narrator states “animal fodder
dominates at 74.1%,” the corresponding pie-chart segment is high-
lighted simultaneously, demonstrating narration-synchronized cross-
modal alignment without manual timeline adjustment. Both narrative
quality and animation effectiveness score 5/5.
Additional Cross-Domain Examples. Figures 8 and 9 provide two fur-
ther high-quality cases from environmental science and gender-based
compensation, illustrating DATAMAGIC’s ability to preserve numeri-
cal fidelity, convey fine-grained comparisons, and maintain coherent
narration–visual coordination across domains.
Numerical Accuracy in Scientific Data (Environmental Science).
The sensitivity to data fluctuations is evident in the environmental
science case (Figure 8). When analyzing meteorological data from May
2016, the system correctly identifies the temperature peak of 12.8°C
on May 28th and synchronizes the visualization of solar radiation as it
recovers from 106.2 W/m² to 326.0 W/m² within two days. Through
the logical progression in Charts 3 and 4, the system reveals the inverse
relationship between variables, such as radiation dropping to near zero
when humidity exceeds 90%, and radiation increasing to 9.4 W/m² as
temperatures cool to 2.7°C overnight.
Representation of Fine-Grained Disparities (Gender-based Com-
pensation). Furthermore, the gender-based compensation case (Fig-
ure 9) validates the ability of the system to represent fine-grained
compensation disparities. In Chart 2, the visual output effectively sup-
ports the narrative’s finding that female employees earn an average of
$70,582, surpassing males by $7,232. To provide deeper insights, Chart
3 identifies the highest salary point for EX1 level females at $236,000,
while Chart 4 utilizes departmental comparisons to clarify the distribu-
tion of gender pay gaps across administration and operational divisions.
A.3
Analysis of Low-Quality Generations
Despite the robustness of DATAMAGIC, certain limitations persist
when dealing with extreme data distributions or complex multi-modal
instructions.
Analysis of DATAMAGIC Limitations (Agriculture). In the agricul-
ture case shown in Figure 10, extreme disparities in input values cause
the visualization elements in Chart 2 to fail to adapt to the preset lay-
out, resulting in Viewport Clipping [1] where the pie chart is partially
truncated. This instability is also reflected in cross-modal consistency;
for instance, a Cross-modal Hallucination [2-a] occurs where the audio
narration mentions a value of 40.6% while the visual label displays
Table 3. Dataset sources and scale distribution.
Source
Datasets
Samples
Small
(<100 rows)
Med.
(100-1K)
Large
(>1K rows)
T2R-bench
36
85
4
14
18
DAComp-DA
24
24
2
7
15
Total
60
109
6
21
33
Table 4. Dataset dimension statistics.
Dimension
Min
Median
Max
Mean
Rows
23
1,436
150,000
17,065.58
Columns
3
16
555
32.42
Numeric columns
1
8
552
24.25
Categorical columns
0
7
57
8.17
40.9%. Additionally, Chart 4 reveals a Semantic Gap [2-b] where the
visual content focuses on land ownership and fertilizer use despite the
query specifically requesting an analysis of cotton yields, indicating a
failure to fully address the user’s analytical intent.
Analysis of Baseline Limitations (Energy). By comparison, the lim-
itations of the baseline model (based on Claude-Sonnet-4) are more
pronounced in the energy analysis case (Figure 11). The baseline fails
in Chart 1 due to Missing Visual Evidence [1], where the bar chart
is not rendered, accompanied by severe Temporal Asynchrony [2-a]
where the text lags behind the audio. In Charts 2 and 3, a lack of
layout logic leads to significant Visual Occlusion, characterized by the
erroneous stacking of multiple charts [3-a] and overlapping text blocks
for strategic solutions [3-b], rendering the information illegible. Finally,
persistent Temporal Asynchrony [2-b] in Chart 4 results in a complete
disconnect between the captions and the narration, hindering the overall
coherence of the information delivery.
B
EVALUATION DATASET STATISTICS
We build our evaluation set based on two representative benchmark
datasets: T2R-bench [74] and DAComp-DA [19]. The final evaluation
set contains 60 datasets and 109 test samples, covering diverse data
scales, query types, and application domains.
B.1
Dataset Scale Distribution and Dimensions
The dataset sources and scale statistics are shown in Table 3. Overall,
our evaluation set covers a broad range of dataset sizes, from fewer
than 100 rows (Small) to more than 1K rows (Large), sufficient for
evaluating DATAMAGIC across different data volumes. Table 4 further
summarizes the physical dimensions of the 60 datasets: the largest
dataset contains 150,000 rows, and some tables contain up to 555
columns, with numeric columns dominating (up to 552) and categorical
columns contributing additional semantic signals (up to 57).
B.2
Query Type Analysis
The query type distribution of the 109 test samples is summarized
in Table 5, showing a broad coverage of data analysis tasks from
multiple perspectives. The comprehensive analysis represents more
than one quarter of the samples, which increases the complexity and
difficulty of the task. Meanwhile, correlation analysis, trend analysis,
comparative analysis, and distribution analysis provide a balanced
task structure, ensuring that the evaluation set can thoroughly assess
DATAMAGIC’s logical reasoning and narrative quality in diverse data
video composition scenarios.
B.3
Domain and subdomain of evaluation data
By combining real-world industrial data from T2R-bench with enter-
prise business data from DAComp-DA, we summarize the evaluation
set into 6 domains and 22 sub-domains, as shown in Table 6. This
setting provides broad domain coverage and matches real-world appli-
cation needs.


Claude-Sonnet-4
DeepSeek-V3.2
Gemini-2.5-pro
GPT-5
...
...
...
...
DataMagic (Ours)
00:07s
00:20s
00:45s
01:05s
...
Text-Chart Overlap
Clipping
Misaligned (content)
Misaligned (content)
High quality
Empty scene
Text-Chart Overlap
Chart-Chart Overlap
Missing chart
High quality
Visual Integrity
Layout & Rendering
Cross-modal Alignment (content / timing) 
High Quality
✓
Text-Chart Overlap
Chart-Chart Overlap
Text-Chart Overlap
Missing chart
High quality
Misaligned (timing)
Misaligned (timing)
Misaligned (timing)
Misaligned (timing)
High quality
Doesn’t align with the audio
Doesn’t align with the audio
This premium electronic...
Our data reveals fascinating ...
Audio-visual mismatch 
(missing scene)
Audio-visual mismatch 
(missing scene)
Audio-visual mismatch 
(missing scene)
Audio-visual mismatch 
(missing scene)
Fig. 6. Comparative Analysis of Video Generation Quality Across Different Methods
Example: [Topic: Agriculture & Forestry, Datasets: pakistan_biomass_field_survey] (Overall Score: 4.6, Generated by DataMagic)
Query: "Evaluate the relationship between diverse irrigation techniques and wheat productivity throughout Punjab, with particular 
attention to crop residue management practices and their economic repercussions."
timestamp: 0’01s
Let's explore how irrigation methods 
and residue managgement impact 
wheat productivity in Punjab.
timestamp: 0’08s
Let's start by examining wheat yields 
across different irrigation methods in 
Punjab.
timestamp: 0’30s
Animal fodder dominates at 74.1 
percent, while field burning accounts 
fo 14.3 percent of residue disposal.
timestamp: 0’48s
Brick kilns offer the highest price at 
7,873 rupees per ton, while paper 
imills pay only 1,750 rupees.
comment:
Evaluation Score: intent fulfillment: 4, data insights: 4, narrative quality: 5, animation effectiveness: 5, aesthetic quality: 5
Well-produced with a structured narrative and professional aesthetics that enhance information delivery. Despite a slight numerical error, the 
video effectively addresses the query with high-quality insights.
....
Fig. 7. A representative high-quality case generated by DATAMAGIC (Agriculture, overall score: 4.6). Four key frames are shown with their
corresponding narration (italicized). Underlined spans in the narration are the index triggers in DVSPEC that fire the co-occurring visual highlights,
demonstrating precise audio-visual synchronization without manual timeline adjustment.
C
AGENT PROMPTS
DATAMAGIC ’s multi-agent framework relies on carefully crafted sys-
tem prompts to enforce clear boundaries of responsibility, standardized
input–output formats, and explicit collaboration protocols across agents.
In this appendix, we present the prompt structure and core instructions
for the key agents.
There are two stages in the pipeline. The first stage is to gener-
ate configuration files for the video. The second stage is to generate
executable files based on the configuration files generated in the first
stage.
Note: In the following prompts, metadata refers to the summary of
the dataset structure, not the full data.


Case 1: [Topic: Environmental Protection, Datasets: Environmental_Weather_Radiation_Data] (Overall Score: 4.6, Generated by DataMagic)
Query: "Examine the interrelationship between temperature and solar radiation for May 2016, placing emphasis on trends and insights 
gleaned from changes over time in atmospheric conditions."
timestamp: 0’01s
Let's explore how temperature and 
solar radiation interact throughout 
May 2016.
timestamp: 0’15s
timestamp: 1’09s
timestamp: 1’26s
Temperature peaked at 12.8°C on May 28th 
while solar radiation showed dramatic swings, 
dropping to 106.2 W/m2 on the 24th before 
recovering to 326.0W/m2 two days later.
We see a strong negative correlatio -- 
when humidity exceeds 90%, solar 
radiation drops to near zero, while lower 
humidity allows values up to 1,041.2 W/m2.
On May 20th, temperature cooled to 
2.7°C overnight before solar radiation 
rapidly increased to 9.4 W/m2 at sunrise, 
showing the inverse relationship.
comment:
Evaluation Score: intent fulfillment: 4, data insights: 4, narrative quality: 5, animation effectiveness: 5, aesthetic quality: 5
Professionally produced with clear logic and high-quality visuals, this video delivers impactful insights. A minor numerical discrepancy exists, 
yet it does not detract from the overall clarity or core message.
....
Fig. 8. High-quality Case 1 (Environmental Science): High-fidelity tracking of meteorological fluctuations and solar radiation swings.
Case 2: [Topic: Food & Beverage, Datasets: 2023_Employee_Salaries_Data] (Overall Score: 4.4, Generated by DataMagic)
Query: "Examine discrepancies in compensation by gender within the Alcohol Beverage Services sector, analyzing trends and insights 
across diverse ranks and functions, as highlighted in the dataset."
timestamp: 0’01s
Let's examine compensation 
disparities between genders in the 
Alcohol Beverage Services sector.
timestamp: 0’14s
Female employees earn an average of 
seventy thousand five hundred eighty-two
dollars, outpacing males by seven thousand 
two hundred thirty-two dollars.
timestamp: 0’26s
Executive level EX1 females earn the 
highest salary at two hundred thirty-six
thousand dollars, while gender gaps vary 
significantly across different grades.
timestamp: 0’45s
Males earn significantly more in 
Administration, while females lead in 
the Director's Office and several 
operational divisions.
comment:
Evaluation Score: intent fulfillment: 4, data insights: 4, narrative quality: 5, animation effectiveness: 5, aesthetic quality: 4
This high-quality video features a logical narrative and precise animations that clarify complex data. Despite a minor overlap in X-axis labels, it 
delivers deep insights and addresses the query effectively.
....
Fig. 9. High-quality Case 2 (Gender-based Compensation): Visualization of complex gender-based compensation disparities across divisions.
Table 5. Query type distribution of the sample dataset.
Query Type
Count
Percentage
Typical Patterns
Trend analysis
12
11.0%
Time-series changes;
Periodic patterns
Comparative analysis
15
13.8%
Cross-category comparison;
Ranking analysis
Distribution analysis
18
16.5%
Value distribution;
Proportion
Correlation analysis
33
30.2%
Variable relationships;
Correlation
Comprehensive analysis
31
28.4%
Multi-dimensional analysis
Total
109
100.0%
–
C.1
Scene Planner Agent
Prompt Template: Scene Planner Agent
You are a data analysis planner specializing in planning
visualization analyses.
Task: Based on the user’s query and dataset summary, plan
what data analyses are needed to answer the query.
Input
• User Query: {query}
• Dataset Summary: {metadata}
Your Role
Plan the material list - what analyses/visualizations should
be created. Think like a photographer planning what shots to
take, NOT like a director planning the final edit sequence.
Output Format (JSON)
{
"narrative_pattern": "freytag_default",
"scenes": [


Query: "Explore the relationship between land tenure and cotton yields in Sindh, highlighting practices in residue management and the 
propensity of farmers towards collaborative initiatives."
Case 1: [Topic: Agriculture & Forestry, Datasets: pakistan_biomass_field_survey] (Overall Score: 3.0, Generated by DataMagic)
timestamp: 0’15s
timestamp: 0’01s
timestamp: 0’32s
timestamp: 0’43s
....
Exactly 2,384 farmers show universal engage-
ment across cooperative harvesting, bargaining 
representation, and biomass baling opportunities.
Field burning dominates at 40.6 
percent, while sustainable fertilizer use 
remains minimal at just 1.8 percent.
Let's explore how cotton farmers in Sindh 
manage residues and approach 
collaborative farming initiatives.
Most farmers are complete landowners, 
yet residue fertilizer adoption remains 
extremely low regardless of tenure status.
Evaluation Score: intent fulfillment: 3, data insights: 2, narrative quality: 3, animation effectiveness: 4, aesthetic quality: 3
The video is well-structured and the animation quality is good. However, its value is severely hampered by a major analytical flaw (a key 
insight contradicts the visual data) and a failure to address the core part of the user query (cotton production).
Viewport Clipping: The pie chart is partially cut off due to layout miscalculations; visual data is incomplete.
comment:
humans 
comment:
1
1
1
2-a
2-a
2-b
2
2-b 
Cross-modal Hallucination: Factual conflict between the audio narration (40.6%) and the on-screen visual label (40.9%).
Semantic Gap: Visual content (Fertilizer Use) fails to align with the analytical query (Cotton Yields).
Visual Integrity and Continuity
Correctness and Cross-modal Alignment
Fig. 10. Low-quality Case 1 (Agriculture): Analysis of layout truncation and numerical discrepancies in DATAMAGIC under extreme data distributions.
Visual Integrity and Continuity
Correctness and Cross-modal Alignment
Layout Logic and Rendering Quality
2
1
3
Case 2: [Topic: Energy & Power, Datasets: malawi_energy_access_survey_data] (Overall Score: 2.0, Generated by claude-sonnet-4)
Query: "Assess the effects of mobile phone charging expenses on electricity consumption across diverse districts, and offer a detailed 
exposition evaluating the advantages and obstacles of augmenting charging stations within a 500-meter vicinity of residential areas."
3-b
3-a
1
2-a
on electricity consumption...
timestamp: 0’02s
Our analysis of 71 households reveals 
striking patterns in charging costs and 
energy usage
timestamp: 0’16s
However, they experience frequent 
interruptions lasting 3 to 7 hours.
timestamp: 0’26s
Solar-powered charging stations offer a 
strategic solution.
2-b
many still charge outside...
timestamp: 0’43s
Strategic placement and improved grid 
reliability can maximize benefits while 
minimizing costs.
comment:
Evaluation Score: intent fulfillment: 2, data insights: 2, narrative quality: 2, animation effectiveness: 2, aesthetic quality: 2
The video fails in intent fulfillment. Despite detailed narration, the visuals are disconnected and contradictory. Coupled with overlapping text 
and missing animations, these flaws result in poor credibility and significant confusion.
humans 
comment:
1
Missing Visual Evidence: The bar chart failed to render, leaving the analytical section without visual grounding.
2-a Temporal Asynchrony: The on-screen text lags behind the narration, creating a timing mismatch between audio and visual channels.
3-a Visual Occlusion (Charts): Bar chart, pie chart, and headers are erroneously stacked, rendering the data visualization illegible.
Visual Occlusion (Text): Multiple text blocks directly overlap, causing severe information clutter.
3-b
Temporal Asynchrony: Persistent audio-visual misalignment where narrative content fails to synchronize with displayed captions.
2-b
....
Fig. 11. Low-quality Case 2 (Energy): Analysis of systemic failures in baseline models across layout logic and cross-modal alignment.
{
"id": "unique_id",
"type": "chart",
"query": "Specific query with column names",
"analysis_type": "primary_intent",
"intent": ["intent1", "intent2"],
"priority": 0.0-1.0,
"context": "Why this analysis matters",
"required_fields": ["field1", "field2"]
}
]
}
Analysis Types
trend, composition, comparison, distribution, correlation,
find_extremum, rank, summary, magnitude.
Narrative Pattern
Choose one pattern that best fits the shape of the
story, used later by the Narrative Director to sequence


Table 6. Domains and sub-domains.
Domains
Sub-domains
Technology and
Engineering
Electronics and Automation Manufacturing;
Academic Research;
Energy Production and Power Systems;
Automotive Industry
Environmental
Management
Environmental Protection;
Agriculture and Forestry;
Resource Management
Transportation
Logistics
Communication and Digital Infrastructure;
Transportation Networks and Logistics Management
Social Policy
Administration
Education Policy and Public Education;
Government Administration and Public Sector Services;
Labor and Employment Administration;
Healthcare Systems and Public Health;
Demographics and Social Development
Commercial Services
and Markets
Retail Trade and E-commerce Platforms;
Tourism and Hospitality Services;
Digital Entertainment and Gaming;
Food and Beverage Services;
Real Estate and Housing Market;
Business Management and Supply Chain
Financial Economics
Economic Development and International Trade;
Banking and Financial Services
scenes:
freytag_default (general-purpose, single dra-
matic peak; the default), hook_then_evidence (news-
style inverted pyramid:
the most striking finding stated
first), comparison_driven (A-vs-B contrasts dominate),
time_driven (chronological progression), drill_down
(overview to segments to individual drivers).
Critical Rules
• Plan ONLY “chart” type scenes (stat_cards generated
automatically later)
• Each scene must have specific, executable query with
explicit column names
• Use priority (0.0-1.0): 1.0 = main query answer, 0.8-0.9
= key supporting, 0.6-0.7 = context, 0.4-0.5 = details,
0.2-0.3 = optional
• Provide context explaining why each analysis matters
• Focus on WHAT to analyze, not HOW to visualize
• Select 2-4 distinct angles, ensure adjacent scenes have
different intent lists
• Avoid redundant scenes or multiple scenes showing same
data from nearly identical angles
• Output a top-level narrative_pattern (one of the five
values above) based on the shape of the story
• DO NOT include: opening/closing scenes, stat cards,
strict scene order, narration text, chart type specifications
Examples
{example}
Final Instruction
Now create the analysis plan. Return ONLY the JSON, noth-
ing else.
Example: The following demonstrates a concrete example of the
Scene Planner Agent’s output format and decision-making process.
This example illustrates how to structure the analysis plan based on a
user query.
C.1.1
Scene Planner Agent Example
Query: “Compare flight delays across carriers and desti-
nations in 2015”
"scenes": [
{
"id": "analysis_carrier_comparison",
"type": "chart",
"query": "Group by carrier column, calculate average
of depdelay column",
"analysis_type": "comparison",
"priority": 1.0,
"context": "Primary analysis: carrier performance
comparison"
},
{
"id": "analysis_destination_delays",
"type": "chart",
"query": "Group by destcity column, calculate average
of arrdelay column",
"analysis_type": "distribution",
"priority": 0.9,
"context": "Primary analysis: destination city delays"
}
]
Note: No stat_cards needed - charts clearly show the compar-
isons requested.
C.2
Data Preparation Agent
Prompt Template: Data Preparation Agent
You are a data transformation planner.
Task: Analyze the sub-query and determine what data trans-
formations are needed to prepare the data for visualization.
Input
• Sub-Query: {sub_query}
• Analysis Type: {analysis_type}
• Required Fields: {required_fields}
• Dataset Metadata: {metadata}
Transformation Types
• group_by_aggregate:
Comparisons, distributions,
part-to-whole, overall statistics, or 2D heatmap (use
TWO fields in group_by_fields)
• time_series_aggregate: Trends over time
• top_n: Finding extremes, rankings
• correlation_data:
Correlation analysis, scatter
plots (ALWAYS use this for
correlation,
NOT
filter_and_select)
• filter_and_select: Simple filtering and field selec-
tion
• sample_representative: General analysis when no
specific aggregation needed
Output Format (JSON)
{
"transformation_type":"group_by_aggregate|
time_series_aggregate|filter_and_select|top_n|
correlation_data|sample_representative",


"group_by_fields": ["field1"],
"aggregate_fields": {"field2": "avg", "field3": "sum"},
"time_field": "date",
"time_grouping": "month",
"x_field": "field1",
"y_field": "field2",
"derived_fields": {"new_field": "field1 / field2"},
"filter": {"field": "value", "field2": "not null"},
"select_fields": ["field1", "field2"],
"sort_by": "avg_field2",
"sort_order": "desc",
"limit": 10,
"sample_size": 20,
"description": "Brief description of what this
transformation does"
}
Critical Rules
• Use ONLY existing fields from the dataset metadata
• Determine ALL necessary filters from sub-query (scope,
quality, logical)
• For overall statistics: use group_by_aggregate with
empty group_by_fields
• Keep filters minimal - only add what’s explicitly required
• Use actual values in filters, NO placeholders
• If query mentions specific location, ALWAYS include
filter field
• Always include a clear description
• Return a SINGLE JSON OBJECT, NOT an array
Examples
{example}
Final Instruction
Now plan the transformation. Return ONLY the JSON object,
nothing else.
Example: The following demonstrates a concrete example of the
Data Preparation Agent’s transformation planning process. This exam-
ple shows how to analyze a sub-query and determine the appropriate
data transformation with filters and aggregation.
C.2.1
Data Preparation Agent Example
Comparison with Scope Filter
Sub-query:“Compare wheat yield across different irrigation
methods in Punjab province”
Analysis Type: comparison
Required Fields: ["Province", "Crop", "Method of irrigation",
"Yield, maund"]
Output:
{
"transformation_type": "group_by_aggregate",
"group_by_fields": ["Method of irrigation"],
"aggregate_fields": {
"Yield, maund": "avg"
},
"filter": {
"Province": "Punjab",
"Crop": "Wheat",
"Yield, maund": "not null",
"Method of irrigation": "not null"
},
"sort_by": "avg_Yield, maund",
"sort_order": "desc",
"description": "Filter to Punjab wheat data, group by
irrigation method, calculate average yield
excluding null values"
}
C.3
Visual Designer Agent
Prompt Template: Visual Designer Agent
You are a professional data visualization designer specializing
in chart configuration.
Task: Generate a chart visualization configuration based on
the query and data. DO NOT write narration - only provide a
brief insight summary.
Input
• Sub-Query: {query}
• Analysis Type: {analysis_type}
• Planned Scene Type: {planned_type} (MUST follow
this type)
• Processed Data: {data}
Chart Selection & Data Requirements
• Select appropriate chart type based on analysis type and
data characteristics:
– comparison/magnitude
→
bar_chart,
grouped_bar_chart (≥2 data points)
– trend/change_over_time
→
line_chart,
area_chart (≥3 time points)
– part_to_whole/proportion
→
pie_chart,
donut_chart (≥2 categories)
– hierarchical/composition →treemap, sun-
burst (≥3 hierarchical nodes)
– correlation/distribution →scatter_chart,
bubble_chart (≥3 data points)
– 2D distribution/density →heatmap, con-
tour_plot (≥4 data points)
– ranking/ordered_comparison
→
horizon-
tal_bar_chart, lollipop_chart
• Note: The chart types above represent commonly used
configurations. The declarative specification framework
supports additional visualization types through the ex-
tensible rendering engine.
• If insufficient data for charts, create stat_cards instead
• For “stat_cards” scenes: Generate 2-4 key metrics
(maximum 4)
Output Format (JSON)
{
"scenes": [
{
"id": "scene_chart_1",
"type": "chart",
"content": {
"chart_type": "bar_chart",
"title": "Short, descriptive title",
"data": [...],
"data_binding": {


"x_axis": {"field": "category", "label":
"Category"},
"y_axis": {"field": "value", "label": "Value"}
},
"style": {
"background_color": "{background_color}",
"container_background": "{container_background}",
"bar_color": "#5b8ff9",
"text_color": "#e8eaed",
"grid_color": "#2a3f5f",
"axis_color": "#8c98a4"
},
"layout": {
"margin": {"top": 80, "right": 60, "bottom": 100,
"left": 100},
"chart_area": {"width": 1120, "height": 540}
}
},
"insight_summary": "Brief summary of what this chart
shows (1-2 sentences)"
}
]
}
Critical Rules
• MUST follow planned_type (chart or stat_cards)
• MUST use ONLY provided data - all numbers must
match exactly, convert wide to long format for bar_chart
• Chart type must match analysis type and have sufficient
data points
• Include ALL query-requested dimensions/categories
(even if zero/small)
• Title: clear and descriptive; insight_summary: describe
KEY finding visible in visualization
• Theme consistency (soft constraint): Prefer using
the provided theme tokens (e.g., background_color,
container_background) for a coherent overall look.
You MAY introduce subtle per-scene variation (e.g.,
slight lightness/opacity changes or a gentle gradient)
as long as readability and overall theme consistency are
preserved.
• DO NOT include:
“narration” field, timing fields
(time_range, time_start, time_end)
• DO NOT omit dimensions mentioned in query, generate,
estimate, or invent data values
Examples
{example}
Final Instruction
Now generate the visualization configuration. Return ONLY
the JSON, nothing else.
Example: The following demonstrates examples of good and bad
insight summaries for the Visual Designer Agent. These examples
illustrate how to write effective insight summaries that highlight key
findings from the visualization.
C.3.1
Visual Designer Agent Example
Example Insight Summary
• Good: “Q3 sales surged 50% above Q2, marking the
strongest quarterly growth of the year.”
• Good: “San Francisco experiences the highest delay
rate at 35 minutes, significantly worse than Boston’s 12
minutes.”
• Bad: “This chart shows sales data.” (too vague)
• Bad: “The analysis indicates variations.” (not specific)
C.4
Narrative Director Agent
Prompt Template: Narrative Director Agent
You are a professional video director and scriptwriter
specializing in data visualization videos.
Task: Given all generated visualization scenes and the cho-
sen narrative_pattern, arrange them into a dramatically
coherent order, write a complete script (opening, scene narra-
tions, closing), and optionally generate a stat_cards scene that
summarizes key metrics from the chart data.
Input
• User Query: {query}
• Narrative Pattern: {narrative_pattern}
• Generated Scenes (complete scene configurations):
{scenes_info}
Narrative Pattern Strategy
The narrative_pattern guides scene ordering, climax
placement, pacing, and transition style:
• freytag_default: Setting →Rising →Climax →
Resolution; build toward one main finding.
• hook_then_evidence: lead with the most striking
finding, then provide supporting evidence.
• comparison_driven: keep contrasting scenes adjacent
and make transitions explicitly signal the contrast.
• time_driven: preserve chronological order and use
temporal transitions.
• drill_down: move from overview to segments to
drivers, using zoom-in transitions.
Your Tasks
1. Arrange Scene Order (pattern-driven): Order scenes
by the narrative_pattern from the Scene Plan-
ner.
By default (freytag_default), follow Frey-
tag’s Pyramid:
Setting (context/overview) →Ris-
ing (build evidence) →Climax (the single most im-
portant finding) →Resolution (recap), and emit the
stage assignment as narrative_arc. Alternative pat-
terns (hook_then_evidence, comparison_driven,
time_driven, drill_down) override this default or-
dering. Stat cards, if generated, belong in the Resolution
stage.
2. Generate Opening Scene: Title (max 8-10 words), Sub-
title (5-10 words), Narration (1 sentence, 12-18 words)
introducing topic.


3. Write Scene Narrations: For EACH scene, write 1-2
sentences (10-15 words each), describe chart and high-
light key insight, connect with transition phrases for
continuous story flow.
4. Generate Stat Cards Scene (Optional): When query
asks for “key metrics”/“summary statistics” or summa-
rizing enhances narrative. Extract metrics DIRECTLY
from chart scenes’ data, create 2-4 cards (max 4). Prefer
the same theme tokens as chart scenes; you MAY apply
subtle per-scene background variation while preserving
readability and overall theme consistency.
5. Generate Closing Scene: Title “Thank You” or brief
message (max 5 words), Narration (1 sentence, 15-20
words) summarizing KEY findings from ALL scenes.
Output Format (JSON)
{
"narrative_arc": {
"setting": ["scene_id1"],
"rising": ["scene_id2"],
"climax": "scene_id3",
"resolution": ["scene_stats"]
},
"scene_order": ["scene_id1", "scene_id2", "scene_id3"],
"opening": {
"id": "scene_opening",
"type": "opening",
"content": {
"title": "Title",
"subtitle": "Subtitle",
"style": {
"text_color": "#ffffff",
"subtitle_color": "#e0e0e0"
}
},
"narration": [{"text": "Opening narration"}]
},
"scene_narrations": {
"scene_id1": [{"text": "First narration line"},
{"text": "Second line"}]
},
"stat_cards": {
"id": "scene_stats",
"type": "stat_cards",
"content": {
"title": "Key Metrics Summary",
"cards": [
{
"title": "Metric Name",
"value": "Formatted Value",
"subtitle": "Unit/Description",
"color": "#hexcode"
}
],
"style": {
"background_color": "#0f1419",
"container_background": "#0f1419",
"card_background": "#1a2332",
"text_color": "#e8eaed",
"accent_color": "#5b8ff9",
"border_color": "#2a3f5f"
}
},
"narration": [{"text": "Stat cards narration"}]
},
"closing": {
"id": "scene_closing",
"type": "closing",
"content": {
"title": "Thank You",
"style": {
"text_color": "#ffffff",
"subtitle_color": "#e0e0e0"
}
},
"narration": [{"text": "Closing narration summarizing
key findings"}]
}
}
Critical Requirements:
1. Data and Format Rules
• Number
Formatting:
≥1M:
“X.X
mil-
lion”/“X.XM”, ≥1K: “X.X thousand”/“X.XK”,
<1K: exact number,
proportions:
convert
to percentage (1 decimal, e.g., 0.944444 →
“94.4%”)
• Year/Time Accuracy: When mentioning specific
year/time, MUST use data value for THAT EX-
ACT year, not peak values from other time points
• Multiple Y-Axis: If data_binding.y_axis is array,
mention all relevant metrics in narration
• Stat Cards Values:
Must match EXACTLY
what’s shown in chart scenes’ data
2. Structure and Narration Rules
• scene_order must include ALL scene IDs from
input; if generating stat_cards, add “scene_stats”
to scene_order (typically after chart scenes)
• Always emit narrative_arc (Setting/Rising/Cli-
max/Resolution), assigning every chart scene to
exactly one stage
• Narration lengths: Opening 1 sentence (12-18
words), Scene 1-2 sentences (10-15 words each),
Closing 1 sentence (15-20 words)
• Narration must flow as continuous story with tran-
sitions, reference specific data/insights from in-
sight_summary
• Use consistent background colors: “#0f1419”,
“#1a2332”
• DO NOT include:
timing fields (time_range,
time_start, time_end, audio_file), verbose narra-
tion, stat_cards with mismatched values, data from
wrong time points
Examples
{example}
Final Instruction
Now generate the scene order and complete script. Return
ONLY the JSON, nothing else.
Example: The following demonstrates a concrete example of good
narration with smooth transitions between scenes. This example illus-
trates how to write coherent scene narrations that flow as a continuous
story.


C.4.1
Narrative Director Agent Example
Good Narration with a Freytag Arc (Setting, Rising, Cli-
max, Resolution)
• (Setting) Scene 1: “First, the overall landscape. Total
revenue reached 4.2 billion across all regions.”
• (Rising) Scene 2: “But not all regions grew equally.
Europe and the Americas averaged 12 percent.”
• (Climax) Scene 3: “Asia surged 58 percent, three times
faster than any other region.”
• (Resolution) Closing: “Across all regions, growth aver-
aged 18 percent year over year.”
C.5
Scene Animation Generator Agent
Prompt Template: Scene Animation Generator Agent
You are an animation designer for data videos following the
“narration-animation interplay” approach.
Task: Add entrance and emphasis animations for ONE scene
that sync with narration timing.
Critical Requirement: One narration can have multiple em-
phasis animations - create one animation for EACH entity
mentioned in the narration.
Input
• Current
Scene
(complete
information):
{cur-
rent_scene}
• Context: {context}
• Position: {position} of {total_scenes} (1-based)
Process
1. Read narration text carefully, identify ALL entity names
(companies, products, categories, data points)
2. Create ONE entrance animation:
bind to trig-
ger_narration: 0, auto-select effect based on chart_type
3. Create ONE emphasis animation for EACH entity: bind
to trigger_narration: <index> where entity is first men-
tioned, use “pulse” effect with intensity 0.1, extract
data_filter from entity name
Animation Effects Guidelines
• Select entrance and emphasis animations appropriate for
the chart type:
– Bar/Column Charts:
entrance grow_bars,
slide_in; emphasis pulse, highlight
– Line/Area
Charts:
entrance
draw_line,
fade_in; emphasis pulse, glow
– Pie/Donut Charts:
entrance grow_slices,
rotate_in; emphasis pulse, expand
– Treemap/Hierarchical:
entrance
zoom_in,
cascade; emphasis pulse, border_highlight
– Scatter/Bubble Charts:
entrance fade_in,
sequential,
scale_in;
emphasis
pulse,
enlarge
– Heatmap: entrance fade_in, cell_by_cell;
emphasis pulse, intensity_boost
– Stat Cards: entrance fade_in, slide_up; em-
phasis pulse, glow
– Opening/Closing: entrance/exit fade_in/out,
slide_in/out, zoom
• Note: The animation effects above represent commonly
used patterns. The system supports custom animation
sequences through the declarative synchronization mech-
anism.
• Common emphasis effect: pulse with intensity 0.1 for
most chart types
Output Format (JSON)
{
"animations": [
{
"id": "entrance_anim",
"type": "entrance",
"effect": "grow_bars",
"trigger_narration": 0,
"description": "Chart entrance animation"
},
{
"id": "emphasis_entity",
"type": "emphasis",
"effect": "pulse",
"trigger_narration": 1,
"target_data": {"data_filter": {"field": "value"}},
"style": {"intensity": 0.1},
"description": "Highlight entity when mentioned"
}
]
}
Critical Rules
• Include 1 entrance animation (trigger_narration: 0)
• For each entity mentioned in narration, create 1 emphasis
animation with correct trigger_narration index (must not
exceed number of narrations)
• Do NOT manually set time_start or duration - use trig-
ger_narration for timing synchronization
• Keep all existing configuration fields unchanged, use
consistent animation effects across scenes
Final Instruction
Now generate animations for this scene. Return ONLY the
JSON with animations array, nothing else.
C.6
TSX Static Component Agent
C.6.1
Static Charts Scene
Prompt Template: Static Charts
You are creating a CLEAN, MINIMAL infographic for data
video narration following ChartGalaxy design principles: SIM-
PLE, CLEAR, DATA-FOCUSED.
CRITICAL CONTEXT:
• Current Scene: scene_index of total_scenes
• A global theme is provided in JSON config (e.g.,
background_color, container_background). Pre-
fer using it to keep the UI coherent across scenes.
• You MAY introduce subtle per-scene background varia-
tion (small lightness/opacity shifts or gentle gradients)
while keeping overall theme consistency and strong tex-
t/axis contrast.


• Each scene MUST have a UNIQUE visual identity
CORE PRINCIPLES:
• CLEAN & MINIMAL - No clutter, no excessive decora-
tion
• DATA FIRST - Information clarity >visual effects
• SUBTITLE-FRIENDLY - Reserve top 80px for subtitle
overlay, bottom 180px for subtitle display
• VISUAL CONSISTENCY - Keep typography, spacing,
and overall theme coherent across scenes (background
may vary subtly)
• JSX SAFETY - Escape special characters in JSX text
Data to Visualize:
Title: "chart_title"
Type: chart_type
Canvas:
video_meta.get(’width’,
1280)xvideo_meta.get(’height’, 720)px
Data Binding:
json.dumps(data_binding, indent=2, en-
sure_ascii=False)
Multiple Y-Axis Support:
• If y_axis is an ARRAY →Create GROUPED BAR
CHART
• If y_axis is a DICT →Create standard single bar chart
CRITICAL RULES:
• Use theme tokens from JSON config as defaults
(background_color:
background_color,
con-
tainer_background:
container_background).
You
MAY adjust them slightly per scene (e.g., light-
ness/opacity/gradient) as long as the overall theme
remains consistent and the chart remains highly legible.
• Reserve bottom 180px for subtitle display
• Match
colors
to
data
meaning
(gold=money,
red=problem, green=growth)
• Highlight key data IN THE CHART ITSELF with size/-
color/stroke
• Chart height: ∼350−400px, X-axis labels at y ≤360−
370
• Escape JSX special characters (<, >, &)
• DO NOT add redundant information cards or tooltip
boxes
• DO NOT use the same color scheme for consecutive
scenes
OUTPUT: Generate ONLY the complete TypeScript code -
NO markdown blocks, NO explanations.
C.6.2
Opening, Closing, Stat_cards Scene
Prompt Template: Opening/Closing/Stat Cards Scene
You are creating an OPENING/CLOSING/STAT CARDS
SCENE for a data video.
VIDEO CONTEXT:
• Video Title: "{video_meta.get(’title’, ’Data Insights’)}"
• Scene {scene_index} of {total_scenes}
• Duration: {duration} seconds
SCENE CONTENT:
• Main Title: "{title}"
• Subtitle: "{subtitle}" (for Opening scene only)
• Cards Data: {cards_str} (for Stat Cards scene only)
• Narration: "{narration_text}"
COMMON DESIGN REQUIREMENTS:
• Background:
Use background color from config
({bg_color})
• Typography: Modern sans-serif font (e.g., ’Inter’, ’Hel-
vetica’, ’Arial’)
• Title: Large, bold (font-size: 56-72px, font-weight: 700-
900), color: {text_color}
• Subtitle: Smaller text (font-size: 24-32px, font-weight:
400-500), color: {subtitle_color}
• NO ANIMATIONS: All elements at full opacity and
final positions (animations added later)
• Subtitle Space: Reserve BOTTOM 80-130px for narra-
tion subtitles
SCENE-SPECIFIC REQUIREMENTS:
• Opening: Centered title and subtitle, spacing 20-30px
between them
• Closing: Centered title, optional tagline below (font-
size: 20-24px)
• Stat Cards:
Cards in SINGLE ROW (flexWrap:
’nowrap’), flex: ’1 1 0%’, width: 0 on each card. Each
card: border 2px, padding 28px 20px, number font-size
52px, label font-size 15px. Reserve bottom 130px for
subtitles.
OUTPUT: Generate complete TSX component. See exam-
ples: {Opening_Example C.6.3}, {Closing_Example C.6.3},
{Stat_Card_Example C.6.3}
CRITICAL:
• Replace [ComponentName] with actual component
name
• Keep structure clean and simple
• All styles inline for easy animation later
• DO NOT add animation logic
• Return ONLY complete TSX code, no explanation
Example: The following demonstrates concrete examples of TSX
static component code for different scene types (Opening, Closing,
and Stat Cards). These examples illustrate the expected component
structure, styling, and layout patterns.
C.6.3
TSX Static Component Agent Example
Opening/Closing Scene Example
import React from ’react’;
import { AbsoluteFill } from ’remotion’;
interface SceneProps {
sceneStartOffset?: number;
narrations?: Array<{text: string; time_start: number;
time_end: number}>;
}
export const [ComponentName]: React.FC<SceneProps> = ({
sceneStartOffset = 0 }) => {


return (
<AbsoluteFill style={{...containerStyle}}>
<div style={{...titleStyle}}>{title}</div>
{/* Opening: subtitle with fontSize: 28 */}
{/* Closing: optional summary text with fontSize: 22,
opacity: 0.9 */}
</AbsoluteFill>
);
};
Stat Card Example
import React from ’react’;
import { AbsoluteFill } from ’remotion’;
interface StatCard { number: string; label: string; color:
string; }
interface SceneProps {
sceneStartOffset?: number;
narrations?: Array<{text: string; time_start: number;
time_end: number}>;
title?: string;
}
export const [ComponentName]: React.FC<SceneProps> = ({
sceneStartOffset = 0,
title = "{title}"
}) => {
const cards: StatCard[] = {cards_json};
return (
<AbsoluteFill style={{...containerStyle, paddingBottom:
130}}>
{title &&
<div style={{...titleContainerStyle}}>
<h2>{title}</h2>
</div>}
<div style={{display: ’flex’, flexWrap: ’nowrap’,
gap: 20, ...}}>
{cards.map((card, index) => (
<div key={index} style={{
flex: ’1 1 0%’, width: 0, minWidth: 0,
background: ’rgba(26, 32, 44, 0.8)’,
border: ‘2px solid ${card.color}‘,
...cardStyle
}}>
<div style={{fontSize: 52, color: card.color,
...}}>{card.number}</div>
<div style={{fontSize: 15, color: ’#e0e0e0’,
...}}>{card.label}</div>
</div>
))}
</div>
</AbsoluteFill>
);
};
C.7
Animation Adding Agent
C.7.1
Static Charts Animation
Prompt Template: Animated Chart Component Specifica-
tion
You are a React, D3.js, and Remotion animation expert.
Task
I have a static D3 infographic component, and I need you
to only add animation logic without modifying the static
rendering part.
Scene Information
Title: "{scene_title}"
Animation Configuration: {json.dumps(animations_config,
indent=2)}
Subtitle Configuration: {json.dumps(narrations, indent=2)}
Existing Static Component Code: {static_tsx_code}
What to Do:
1. Add
Remotion
imports:
useCurrentFrame,
useVideoConfig
2. Add hooks: const frame = useCurrentFrame();
const {fps} = useVideoConfig(); const
sceneStartOffset = {scene_start_time};
3. Add second useEffect for animations:
• Implement entrance and emphasis animations
• After entrance ends, force all elements to final
state
• Use precise class selectors (.bar, .dot, etc.), not
broad tag selectors
• Always check if data d exists before accessing
properties
• Use .style(’opacity’, ...)
consistently,
not mixed with .attr()
4. Add
subtitle
display:
Create
getCurrentNarration() helper,
display in bot-
tom area (reserved 35-130px)
5. Modify initial state: Set initial animation values (e.g.,
height: 0, opacity: 0) in first useEffect
Key Requirements:
• Use absolute time (seconds) for animation timing, not
relative progress
• Handle multiple simultaneous animations correctly (use
Set to track highlighted items)
• Use
standard
D3
ease
functions
(e.g.,
d3.easeCubicOut(progress))
• DO NOT modify core static rendering logic or JSX lay-
out structure
Output: Complete TypeScript code with animations. Com-
ponent name: export const SceneComponentAnimated.
No markdown blocks, no explanations.
C.7.2
Opening, Closing, Stat_cards Scene Animation
Prompt Template: Opening/Closing/Stat Cards Scene Ani-
mation
You are adding ANIMATIONS to an OPENING/CLOS-
ING/STAT CARDS SCENE component.
SCENE TIMING:
• Scene starts at: {scene_start_time}s
• Duration: {duration}s
• Number of cards: {num_cards} (for Stat Cards only)
• FPS: 30
ANIMATION CONFIGURATION: (for Stat Cards only)
{animations_json}


COMMON REQUIREMENTS:
• CRITICAL: frame in Sequence is LOCAL (starts from
0), NOT global frame number
• Use relativeTime = frame / fps for animation
timing
• Use
absoluteTime = sceneStartOffset +
relativeTime for subtitle matching
• Import
Remotion
hooks:
useCurrentFrame,
useVideoConfig, interpolate, Easing
• For
Stat
Cards:
Also
import
useMemo,
add
animations?:
Animation[] to SceneProps
• Apply animations to individual elements separately (title,
subtitle, cards), NOT to AbsoluteFill
• Use
interpolate
with
Easing.out(Easing.cubic)
for
smooth
anima-
tions
• Add narration subtitle UI at bottom
• DO NOT change component structure or content
SCENE-SPECIFIC ANIMATIONS:
• Opening: Title and subtitle fade in with slide-up effect
• Closing:
Title fade in + slide up (30px) + scale
(0.92→1.0) over 0.8s, starts at 0.15s. Subtitle fade in +
slide up (20px) over 0.7s, starts at 0.5s. NO fade out.
• Stat Cards: Cards appear sequentially using config’s
stagger_delay. Each card: fades in + scales up +
slides up.
Emphasis: border width 3px + glowing
shadow + pulse (2.5 cycles) when active. MUST use
animations prop from config.
Examples:
{Opening_Example
C.7.3},
{Clos-
ing_Example C.7.3}, {Stat_Card_Example C.7.3}
OUTPUT: Return ONLY the complete animated TSX code,
no explanation.
Example: The following demonstrates concrete examples of an-
imation logic for different scene types (Opening, Closing, and Stat
Cards). These examples illustrate how to add Remotion animation
hooks and implement entrance/emphasis animations that sync with
narration timing.
C.7.3
Animation Adding Agent Example
Opening/Closing Scene Animation Example
export const ComponentName: React.FC<SceneProps> = ({
sceneStartOffset = 0,
narrations = []
}) => {
const frame = useCurrentFrame();
const { fps } = useVideoConfig();
const relativeTime = frame / fps;
const absoluteTime = sceneStartOffset + relativeTime;
// Opening: Simple fade + slide up
const titleProgress = Math.max(0, Math.min(1,
(relativeTime - 0.2) / 0.6));
const titleOpacity = titleProgress;
const titleY = (1 - titleProgress) * 20;
// Closing: Rich layered animation with interpolate
// const titleProgress = interpolate(frame, [titleDelay
* fps, ...], [0, 1],
// { easing: Easing.out(Easing.cubic) });
// const titleScale = 0.92 + 0.08 * titleProgress;
const currentNarration = narrations.find(
n => absoluteTime >= n.time_start && absoluteTime <
n.time_end
);
return (
<AbsoluteFill>
<div style={{...originalTitleStyle, opacity:
titleOpacity,
transform: ‘translateY(${titleY}px)‘}}>
{title}
</div>
{currentNarration && (
<div style={{position: ’absolute’, bottom: 35,
...subtitleStyle}}>
{currentNarration.text}
</div>
)}
</AbsoluteFill>
);
};
Stat Card Animation Example
export const ComponentName: React.FC<SceneProps> = ({
sceneStartOffset = 0,
narrations = [],
animations = [] // MUST receive animations prop
}) => {
const frame = useCurrentFrame();
const { fps } = useVideoConfig();
const relativeTime = frame / fps;
const absoluteTime = sceneStartOffset + relativeTime;
// Extract animations from config
const entranceAnim = useMemo(() =>
animations.find(a => a.type === ’entrance’),
[animations]);
const emphasisAnims = useMemo(() =>
animations.filter(a => a.type === ’emphasis’),
[animations]);
// Card entrance: sequential appearance with stagger
const getCardProgress = (index: number) => {
const cardStartFrame = entranceStartFrame + index *
(staggerDelay * fps);
return interpolate(frame, [cardStartFrame,
cardStartFrame + duration],
[0, 1], { easing: Easing.out(Easing.cubic) });
};
// Card emphasis: pulse effect when mentioned in
narration
const getCardEmphasis = (cardIndex: number) => {
const emphasisAnim = emphasisAnims.find(a =>
a.target_data?.card_index === cardIndex);
if (!emphasisAnim || !isActive) return { scale: 1,
borderWidth: 2 };
const pulse = Math.sin(progress * Math.PI * 2.5) *
intensity * 0.4 + 1;
return { scale: pulse, borderWidth: 3,
boxShadow: ‘0 0 12px ${card.color}40, 0 0 24px
${card.color}20‘ };
};
return (


<AbsoluteFill>
{cards.map((card, index) => {
const progress = getCardProgress(index);
const emphasis = getCardEmphasis(index);
return (
<div key={index} style={{
...originalCardStyle,
opacity: progress,
transform: ‘scale(${0.8 + 0.2 * progress} *
${emphasis.scale})
translateY(${(1 - progress) * 30}px)‘,
border: ‘${emphasis.borderWidth}px solid
${card.color}‘,
boxShadow: emphasis.boxShadow
}}>
{/* Card content */}
</div>
);
})}
</AbsoluteFill>
);
};
D
EVALUATION FRAMEWORK AND CRITERIA
D.1
Detailed Evaluation Framework and Scoring Criteria
This appendix provides a multi-dimensional assessment system for
the generated videos. The design of this system takes into account
the User Intent as well as the three core components of the data
videos: Visualization, Narration, and Animation. We have defined
the following five core indicators (F1-F5), and have formulated detailed
1-5 point scoring standards.
F1: Intent Fulfillment This perspective evaluates whether the data
video solved the user’s problem, rather than just whether it was made
correctly. It focuses on the relevance, completeness, and clarity of the
answer provided.
Prompt: Intent Fulfillment Description and Scoring Crite-
ria (1-5 Scale)
Description:
The primary goal of a data video is to answer the user’s an-
alytical question. Intent Fulfillment evaluates whether the
video answers the user’s query, including the completeness of
the query response, the achievement of analytical goals, and
content relevance. This dimension focuses not on "whether
the visualization is well done," but on "whether it solves the
user’s problem."
Scoring criteria(Strict):
S 1. Completely fails to answer the user’s questions, insights
are irrelevant to user intent, content deviates from the
topic.
S 2. Only surface questions are answered, no deep analysis,
insights are weakly connected to user intent, style is
mismatched. Or, severe misalignment significantly hin-
ders understanding. This score should only be given
when the problem is so severe that the video becomes
completely incomprehensible.
S 3. Some questions are answered, insights are partially rel-
evant, style is acceptable. Or, alignment issues cause
moderate confusion that hinders understanding.
S 4. Main questions are answered, 1-2 minor points may be
missed, insights are relevant but could be deeper, style is
appropriate, no obvious visual-narrative misalignment.
S 5. Only when all user questions are fully answered, the
insights are highly relevant to the user’s intent, and the
video style perfectly matches the target audience. This
is exceptional and rare. Evaluation Focus: Video pre-
sentation quality (smooth animation, clear narration,
visual completeness), not data accuracy.
F2: Data Insight This viewpoint stresses that data insights must be
visually proven to be credible. The value of an insight depends on
whether it can be clearly seen and verified in the visualization.
Prompt: Data Insight Description and Scoring Criteria
(1-5 Scale)
Description:
Data Insight evaluates the quality of discoveries from the data,
including the depth, novelty, relevance, and value of insights.
This dimension focuses on meaningful findings and patterns
extracted from the data, and whether these insights help users
understand the story behind the data. Insights must be visually
verifiable—if an insight is only verbally stated and cannot be
verified or understood from visual elements, its credibility and
value are diminished.
Scoring criteria(Strict):
S 1. No meaningful insights are presented, only raw data
display without analysis, or insights are completely ir-
relevant.
S 2. Insights are superficial, only reveal obvious patterns,
provide limited value. Or, the visuals fail to demonstrate
the stated insights, making them unverifiable. If insights
are not adequately visually supported (e.g., narration
describes dynamic comparisons but visuals are static,
or insights cannot be verified from the visuals), a
score of 2 should be given.
S 3. Insights are acceptable but relatively shallow, reveal
basic patterns, provide some information but lack depth.
Insights have some visual support, but may not be clear
or complete.
S 4. Insights are meaningful and relevant, reveal some pat-
terns, provide useful information, insights are visually
supported but could be deeper.
S 5. Only when insights are extremely profound and mean-
ingful, reveal novel patterns, are highly relevant to the
user query, provide significant value, and are clearly
showcased visually. This requires exceptional analytical
depth. Evaluation Focus: Quality of insight presen-
tation (whether clearly presented visually), not data
accuracy.
F3: Narrative Quality This viewpoint judges how well a story is
structured and how clearly it connects to the data insights. It focuses
on the storytelling itself, not on whether the data is accurate.
Prompt: Narrative Quality Description and Scoring Crite-
ria (1-5 Scale)
Description:
Narrative Quality evaluates the logical quality of the video’s
narration, including narrative coherence, logical completeness,
structural soundness, and the connection between the narrative
and data insights. This dimension focuses on the overall
logical flow of the story, including the completeness of the


beginning, development, climax, and conclusion, as well as
natural transitions between scenes.
Scoring criteria(Strict):
S 1. Narration is chaotic and disorganized, the storyline is
incomprehensible, insights are missing or severely devi-
ated, and there is no clear connection between scenes.
S 2. Narration is insufficiently coherent or has serious logical
gaps, story structure is incomplete or has logical jumps,
scene transitions are abrupt, making the narration diffi-
cult to follow. If there is a serious disconnect between
the narration and the visual presentation (e.g., nar-
ration describes a dynamic process but visuals are
static), a score of 2 should be given.
S 3. Narration is basically coherent but relatively plain, story
structure is basically complete but lacks highlights, in-
sight connection is basically clear but not deep enough,
scene transitions are acceptable. Minor inconsistencies
between narration and visuals (e.g., numerical differ-
ences due to rounding) are tolerable.
S 4. Narration is coherent and logically clear, story structure
is basically complete, insights are clearly connected,
narration and visuals are consistent, scene transitions are
reasonable.
S 5. Only when the narration is extremely coherent and log-
ically clear, the story structure is complete and well-
organized, perfectly connected to insights, the narration
and visuals are completely consistent, scene transitions
are natural and smooth, achieving a professional nar-
rative level. Evaluation Focus: Fluency, structure,
and logic of the narration (whether scene transitions
are natural, narrative structure is clear, story flow is
coherent), not data accuracy.
F4: Animation Effectiveness This aspect assesses how precisely an-
imations are synchronized with the narration and visuals to highlight
key elements at the right moments.
Prompt: Animation Effectiveness Description and Scoring
Criteria (1-5 Scale)
Description:
Evaluates the synchronization of animations with the narration:
whether visual elements (highlights, appearances, annotations,
etc.) emphasize the content being discussed at the appro-
priate moment. This dimension only focuses on animation
timing and pointing accuracy, not data or chart quality. Score
based on the entire video; only downgrade significantly when
problems are recurring or severely impair understanding.
Scoring criteria(Strict):
S 1. Frequent and severe misalignments/highlighting errors,
severely interfering with understanding or making it
almost impossible to understand.
S 2. Multiple noticeable misalignments (>1 second) or fre-
quently highlights wrong elements/points to wrong cate-
gories, causing viewers significant difficulty in matching
narration with visuals, and significantly hindering under-
standing.
S 3. Overall can follow along (<1 second), but timing is un-
stable, omissions are frequent, or highlighting doesn’t
closely "follow the narration"; can still basically under-
stand the main points.
S 4. Generally well synchronized (<0.5 seconds), highlights
correct elements most of the time, occasional minor
timing issues or omissions.
S 5. Almost perfectly synchronized with narration (<0.2 sec-
onds), highlights/appears correct elements every time,
with accurate timing.
F5: Aesthetic Quality This point evaluates the visual polish and design
coherence of a video, focusing on its color scheme, typography, and lay-
out. It judges whether the aesthetic presentation appears professionally
finished and credible, or rough and amateurish.
Prompt: Aesthetic Quality Description and Scoring Crite-
ria (1-5 Scale)
Description:
Evaluates the overall visual aesthetics and professionalism
of the video, including color scheme coordination, typogra-
phy refinement (margins, alignment, whitespace), design de-
tails (rounded corners, shadows, transition effects), and style
consistency. Aesthetic quality reflects the video’s "polish."
High-quality videos feel professional and carefully crafted;
low-quality videos appear rough and amateurish.
Scoring criteria(Strict):
S 1. Color scheme is chaotic and jarring, typography has
serious problems, completely lacks design sense, style is
completely inconsistent, giving the impression of being
haphazardly assembled.
S 2. Multiple design issues affecting visual appeal or read-
ability (obvious overlap, severe cropping, chaotic align-
ment, placeholder feel, etc.) making core information
hard to read or significantly reducing professionalism.
S 3. Overall readable and basically neat, but details are aver-
age; minor local flaws (e.g., slight overlap/cropping/s-
mall font size) are allowed as long as they do not affect
core information acquisition and are not recurring prob-
lems.
S 4. Color scheme and typography are clear and unified, de-
tails are reasonably executed, overall appearance is pro-
fessional; basically no obvious flaws like cropping/over-
lap.
S 5. Only when it reaches a professional designer’s level:
color scheme is refined and harmonious, typography is
polished and meticulous, details are well-crafted, overall
style is highly consistent, visuals are complete and cor-
rectly rendered, with strong visual appeal. Evaluation
Focus: Visual presentation (color scheme, typogra-
phy, design details, visual completeness), not data
accuracy.
D.2
MLLM-as-a-Judge Prompt
To achieve automatic evaluation, we have designed the following
prompt to guide the scoring of Gemini-2.5-Pro.
The evaluation prompt involved the following components:
• {user_query}: User’s original intension or queries of the data.
• {F1_prompt}: Detailed prompt of User Intent in Appendix D.1
• {F2_prompt}: Detailed prompt of Data Insight in Appendix D.1
• {F3_prompt}:Detailed prompt of Narrative Quality in Appendix
D.1


• {F4_prompt}:Detailed prompt of Animation Effectiveness in
Appendix D.1
• {F5_prompt}:Detailed prompt of Aesthetic Quality in Appendix
D.1
Prompt Template: Data Video Evaluation
You are a professional data visualization video evaluation
expert. Please watch this data visualization video carefully
and provide a comprehensive assessment.
Step 1 Video Content Description:
First, provide a detailed description of what you actually ob-
serve in the video. The description should include:
• The data being visualized (topic, metrics, time period,
etc.)
• The types of charts/visualizations displayed
• The narrative content presented (what the narration says,
what text appears on screen)
• The overall structure and flow of the video (describe
only what you actually see, do not assume)
• Key scenes or segments and their sequence
• Any major issues hindering comprehension (e.g., con-
tradictions between narration and visuals, missing
promised animations, placeholder/incomplete visual ele-
ments, cropped/truncated charts, overlapping elements,
misaligned layout)
Key Requirement: Describe only what you truly see and hear.
Do not fabricate, speculate, or assume content not explicitly
present. Remain objective and factual.
At the end of the description, include a concise list of Observed
Issues (if any), strictly based on what you saw/heard.
{user_query}
Step 2: Evaluation Dimensions and Scoring Criteria
After providing the video content description, please provide a
score of 1-5 (with 1 being the lowest and 5 being the highest)
for each of the following five dimensions:
F1:User Intent: {F1_prompt}
F2:Data Insight: {F2_prompt}
F3:Narrative Quality: {F3_prompt}
F4:Animation Effectiveness: {F4_prompt}
F5:Aesthetic Quality: {F5_prompt}
Scoring Requirements:
Please provide a 1-5 score for each dimension according to the
above scoring criteria, accompanied by a brief justification for
the score (1-2 sentences explaining the specific performance
for each dimension).
For each dimension, the justification must cite at least one
specific, observable piece of evidence from the video (e.g.,
a specific on-screen element, a missing/cropped chart, over-
lapping elements, a described but missing animation, or a
specific mismatch). Do not award a high score based solely
on narrative claims if the visual elements fail to show or
support them.
Key Evaluation Principles:
• Evaluate based solely on what you actually observe in
the video. Do not fabricate, speculate, or assume struc-
tures, patterns, or content that are not clearly visible or
audible in the video.
• When describing narrative structure or any other aspect,
mention only what you truly see and hear. If you cannot
clearly identify something, do not mention it or use
vague language like "there seems to be" or "appears to
follow".
• Be accurate and honest. It is better to give a lower score
based on actual observation than a higher score based
on assumptions or fabricated structure.
• Consider overall quality comprehensively; do not pe-
nalize heavily for minor errors: The evaluation should
consider the video’s overall quality comprehensively (an-
imation smoothness, aesthetic quality, narrative clarity,
visual completeness, etc.), rather than assigning a very
low score directly due to a localized issue (e.g., data
contradiction, minor inconsistency). Significant score re-
duction should only occur if a problem is severe enough
to impact the overall viewing experience or render the
video completely incomprehensible.
• Distinguish Major Issues from Minor Discrepan-
cies: Only significant inconsistencies (e.g., order-of-
magnitude differences, opposite trends, incorrect cate-
gories, missing key elements) should be heavily penal-
ized. Minor numerical differences (e.g., due to rounding
or unit conversion) are acceptable and should not sig-
nificantly lower the score.For Aesthetic Quality (F5):
A score of 2 or below is only for issues that seriously
harm readability and professionalism. Minor aesthetic
flaws not significantly impairing the overall experience
are acceptable and merit a score of 3. For Animation
Effectiveness (F4): Distinguish between animation is-
sues (synchronization, timing, highlight accuracy) and
data issues (missing data, incomplete charts). Inabil-
ity to highlight due to missing data is not an animation
misalignment and should impact F1/F2/F3, not F4.
• Interlinked Dimensions: A major issue in one dimension
often affects others. For example, severe animation-
narration misalignment (low F4) can hinder comprehen-
sion (affecting F1) and disrupt narrative flow (affecting
F3). Do not evaluate dimensions in isolation; consider
how problems in one area impact the overall viewing
experience.
Please return the results following the json format below:
{
"video_description": "A detailed and objective
description of the content actually observed in
the video, including data themes, chart types,
narrative content, structure, and key scenes.
Include only what is truly seen and heard,
without speculation or assumptions.",
"scores": {
"intent_fulfillment": {
"score": 4,
"reason": "Addresses the main user questions,
insights are relevant to the intent, video
style is suitable for the target audience."
},
"data_insights": {
"score": 4,
"reason": "Insights are meaningful and relevant,
revealing some patterns, providing useful
information, but could be deeper."
},
"narrative_quality": {
"score": 4,


"reason": "The narrative is coherent and
logically clear, the story structure is
basically complete, insights are clearly
connected, and scene transitions are
reasonable."
},
"animation_effectiveness": {
"score": 4,
"reason": "Animation synchronization is good
(deviation <0.5 seconds), mostly
highlights the correct elements, alignment
is generally accurate."
},
"aesthetic_quality": {
"score": 4,
"reason": "The color scheme is harmonious and
comfortable, typography is clear and
reasonable, with some attention to detail,
overall style is basically unified."
}
},
"overall_score": 4.33,
"summary": "Overall quality is excellent, with
outstanding performance in data fidelity and
visualization effectiveness, good animation
synchronization, and an engaging narrative.
Suggestion: Further optimize intent fulfillment
to ensure all user questions are fully addressed."
}
Please ensure that the returned content is in valid JSON for-
mat and does not contain any markdown code block tags or
anything other than JSON
E
DETAILS OF HUMAN EXPERT VALIDATION AND EVALUATION
INTERFACE
To verify the effectiveness of the MLLM-based automated evaluation
method, we conducted a human expert consistency validation experi-
ment to establish a high-quality ground-truth baseline. The evaluation
panel consisted of three experts with professional backgrounds in data
analysis and video production.
To ensure broad representation and coverage of the complete qual-
ity spectrum, we employed a dual-layered stratified sampling strategy.
First, we performed a preliminary screening from a sample pool gen-
erated by various methods (Direct vs. DATAMAGIC) and base models
(GPT-5, Claude-Sonnet-4, Gemini-2.5-Pro, DeepSeek-V3.2). Subse-
quently, we sampled 15 video cases for each of the four quality inter-
vals: 1-2, 2-3, 3-4, and 4-5 points. Through this balanced mechanism
across both models and scores, we constructed a validation set of 60
videos, supporting broad coverage of the quality distribution for expert
validation.
Table 7. Automated Evaluator–Human Expert Consistency Metrics.
Dimension
Pearson r
MAE
MSE
Overall
0.91
0.38
0.23
Intent
0.78
0.57
0.49
Insight
0.76
0.51
0.47
Narrative
0.83
0.60
0.59
Animation
0.90
0.47
0.48
Aesthetic
0.77
0.73
0.84
The expert review process was conducted via the online evaluation
platform provided for this study. As illustrated in Figure 12, the in-
terface defines a standardized audit workflow for experts: they first
examine the original User Query module on the lower-left to identify
the analytical objectives the video is expected to achieve; then, they use
the interactive player for in-depth observation, focusing on the preci-
sion of audio-visual synchronization and narrative coherence. During
the scoring phase, experts refer to the detailed Scoring Guide pro-
vided in Appendix D.1 to provide quantitative ratings (1-5 scale) across
five dimensions: Intent Fulfillment, Data Insight, Narrative Quality,
Animation Effectiveness, and Aesthetic Quality.
In practice, experts spent approximately 15 to 30 minutes reviewing
each video case. This extended period of meticulous review ensured
that experts could identify subtle logical deviations, cross-modal numer-
ical conflicts, or temporal misalignments. In addition to quantitative
scores, experts utilized the feedback area at the bottom of the interface
to document qualitative defects.
Consistency Results. Table 7 summarizes the agreement between
the automated evaluator and expert scores. Overall scores exhibit a
strong positive correlation (Pearson r = 0.91, p < 0.001) with a mean
absolute error of 0.38. All dimension-level correlations exceed 0.75,
with the strongest agreement for Animation (r = 0.90), followed by
Narrative (r = 0.83); Intent, Aesthetic, and Insight achieve correlations
of 0.78, 0.77, and 0.76, respectively. Although Aesthetic has the largest
absolute error (MAE = 0.73), the results indicate that the automated
evaluator largely preserves experts’ relative quality judgments across
dimensions and quality levels.


Fig. 12. The online evaluation platform used for human expert validation. The interface integrates the original user query, synchronized video
playback, a multi-dimensional scoring guide, and a feedback module for documenting qualitative observations.
