Title: 2026.acl-long.194.pdf

URL Source: https://aclanthology.org/2026.acl-long.194.pdf

Published Time: Thu, 11 Jun 2026 01:09:32 GMT

Number of Pages: 19

Markdown Content:
> Proceedings of the 64th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics (Volume 1: Long Papers) , pages 4217–4235 July 2-7, 2026 ©2026 Association for Computational Linguistics

# Towards Fine-Grained and Multi-Granular Contrastive Language-Speech Pre-training 

Yifan Yang 1*, Bing Han 1*, Hui Wang 3, Wei Wang 1, Ziyang Ma 1, Long Zhou 2†

Zengrui Jin 4, Guanrou Yang 1, Tianrui Wang 5, Xu Tan 2, Xie Chen 1,6 ‡

> 1

X-LANCE Lab, MoE Key Lab of Artificial Intelligence, Jiangsu Key Lab of Language Computing, Shanghai Jiao Tong University 2Tencent Hunyuan 3Nankai University 

> 4

Tsinghua University 5Tianjin University 6Shanghai Innovation Institute 

{yifanyeung,chenxie95}@sjtu.edu.cn 

Abstract 

Modeling fine-grained speaking styles remains challenging for language-speech representation pre-training, as existing speech-text models are typically trained with coarse captions or task-specific supervision, and scalable fine-grained style annotations are unavailable. We present FCaps, a large-scale dataset with fine-grained free-text style descriptions, encompassing 47k hours of speech and 19M fine-grained cap-tions annotated via a novel end-to-end pipeline that directly grounds detailed captions in audio, thereby avoiding the error propagation caused by LLM-based rewriting in existing cascaded pipelines. Evaluations using LLM-as-a-judge demonstrate that our annotations surpass ex-isting cascaded annotations in terms of cor-rectness, coverage, and naturalness. Building on FCaps, we propose CLSP, a contrastive language-speech pre-trained model that inte-grates global and fine-grained supervision, en-abling unified representations across multiple granularities. Extensive experiments demon-strate that CLSP learns fine-grained and multi-granular speech-text representations that per-form reliably across global and fine-grained speech-text retrieval, zero-shot paralinguistic classification, and speech style similarity scor-ing, with strong alignment to human judg-ments. Code and dataset are publicly available at https://github.com/yfyeung/CLSP .

1 Introduction 

Speaking style conveys rich paralinguistic infor-mation beyond lexical content, encompassing both speaker-intrinsic characteristics (e.g., gender, age, and accent) and temporally varying traits (e.g., into-nation, emotion, and expressiveness). In this sense, speaking style is inherently multi-scale: it can be summarized at the global, utterance level without  

> *Equal Contribution. This work was done during an intern-ship at Tencent Hunyuan.
> †Project Leader ‡Corresponding Author

Figure 1: Multi-granular speech style caption similarity scoring for the same speech input by CLSP. Positive cap-tions (green) receive higher scores, while hard negatives (red), despite mainly textual overlap, receive markedly lower scores due to attribute mismatches. 

explicit temporal structure, or described through fine-grained stylistic variation within an utterance. However, modeling speaking style remains chal-lenging. Existing approaches (Ma et al., 2024) typically rely on utterance-level, discrete labels, which limit expressive diversity and fail to cap-ture the temporal structure of speech. Evaluating speaking style is likewise challenging. Widely used subjective human judgments suffer from limited inter-rater consistency and are hard to scale (Yang et al., 2025b). Recent automated alternatives based on large audio language models (OpenAI, 2024b; Comanici et al., 2025) incur huge costs. As a result, there remains substantial scope for fine-grained modeling and scalable evaluation of speaking style in speech–text representation learning. A central bottleneck is the lack of scalable, reli-able, and fine-grained style annotations. Existing speech style-captioned datasets (Jin et al., 2024; Diwan et al., 2025; Wang et al., 2025a) predomi-nantly use cascaded annotation pipelines, in which speech is first labeled with discrete attributes and then rewritten into free-text descriptions by large language models, often introducing error propaga-tion and semantic misalignment. More fundamen-

4217 Table 1: Comparison of open-source English speech style-captioned datasets. Following (Wang et al., 2025a), I1-I5 denote intrinsic speaker traits: age (I1), gender (I2), timbre/texture (I3), mean pitch (I4), and accent (I5). S1-S4 represent situational traits: speaking rate (S1), emotion (S2), expressivity (S3), and volume (S4).                                                                                                                                                             

> Dataset I1 I2 I3 I4 I5 S1 S2 S3 S4 Free-Text End-to-End # Hours Expresso (Nguyen et al., 2023) ✗✗✗✗✗✗✓✓✗✗✗47 EARS (Richter et al., 2024) ✓✓✗✓✓✓✓✓✓✗✗60 PromptSpeech (Guo et al., 2023) ✗✓✗✓✗✓✓✗✓✗✗0.3k TextrolSpeech (Ji et al., 2024) ✗✓✗✓✗✓✓✗✓✗✗0.3k VccmDataset (Ji et al., 2025) ✗✓✗✓✗✓✓✗✓✗✗0.3k LibriTTS-P (Kawamura et al., 2024) ✓✓✓✓✗✓✗✓✓✗✗0.6k DreamVoiceDB (Hai et al., 2024) ✓✓✓✗✗✗✗✓✗✓✗0.3k SpeechCraft (Jin et al., 2024) ✓✓✗✓✗✓✓✗✓✓✗2.4k ParaSpeechCaps (Diwan et al., 2025) ✗✓✓✓✓✓✓✓✓✓✗2.9k ParlerTTS (Lyth and King, 2024) ✗✓✗✓✓✓✗✓✗✓✗44.5k CapSpeech (Wang et al., 2025a) ✓✓✓✓✓✓✓✓✓✓✗33.6k
> FCaps ✓✓✓✓✓✓✓✓✓✓✓47.1k

tally, these intermediate discrete attributes impose a severe information bottleneck, compressing rich, continuous, and temporally varying paralinguistic information into a finite set of predefined categori-cal tags and leading to substantial information loss. With these perspectives in mind, we introduce FCaps, a large-scale speech dataset paired with fine-grained free-text speaking-style descriptions, constructed via an end-to-end annotation pipeline that directly grounds style captions in audio and incorporates agentic verification to improve annota-tion quality. We show that our annotations achieve substantially higher quality than cascaded annota-tions in terms of correctness, coverage, and natu-ralness, as assessed by LLM-as-a-judge. Building on FCaps, we further propose CLSP, a contrastive language–speech pre-trained model that leverages fine-grained and multi-granular supervision to learn unified speech–text representations across differ-ent levels of granularity (illustrated in Figure 1). Extensive experiments demonstrate strong perfor-mance across multiple tasks, including global and fine-grained speech–text retrieval, zero-shot par-alinguistic classification, and speech style similar-ity scoring aligned with human judgments. Our contributions are fourfold: • We present FCaps 1, the largest dataset to date for fine-grained free-text speaking-style descriptions, with 47k hours of speech and 19M captions. • We propose an end-to-end pipeline for fine-grained style annotation, substantially improving annotation quality over existing approaches. • We present CLSP 2, a speech–text dual-encoder 

> 1https://huggingface.co/datasets/yfyeung/FCaps
> 2https://huggingface.co/yfyeung/CLSP

trained with fine-grained and multi-granular con-trastive supervision, enabling unified representa-tion learning across multiple granularities. • We demonstrate that CLSP learns robust and generalizable speech–language representations that perform reliably across multiple tasks, with strong alignment to human judgments. 

2 Related Work 

2.1 Speech Style-Captioned Datasets 

Early efforts such as EARS (Richter et al., 2024) and Expresso (Nguyen et al., 2023) provide human-annotated discrete labels to describe speaking style, while NLSpeech (Yang et al., 2024) employs an-notators to describe speech emotion in natural lan-guage. Subsequent works typically adopt a cas-caded annotation pipeline, where speech is first labeled with discrete tags and then rewritten into natural-language captions. LibriTTS-P (Kawamura et al., 2024) extends LibriTTS-R (Koizumi et al., 2023) by collecting perceptual and impression words and inserting them into predefined templates to form sentences. DreamVoiceDB (Hai et al., 2024) provides human-annotated voice timbre key-words, with corresponding descriptions generated by GPT-4 (OpenAI, 2024a) based on their com-binations. ParaSpeechCaps (Diwan et al., 2025) extends EARS, VoxCeleb (Nagrani et al., 2017), VoxCeleb2 (Chung et al., 2018), and Expresso with additional human-annotated speaking style tags, which are then rewritten into natural language cap-tions using Mistral-7B-Instruct-v0.2 (Jiang et al., 2023). CapSpeech (Wang et al., 2025a) similarly rewrites style tags from existing datasets using Mistral-7B-Instruct-v0.3 (Jiang et al., 2023). Such 4218 Figure 2: Overview of our end-to-end annotation pipeline for generating fine-grained captions, consisting of a detailed captioner and agentic verification with specialist tools. Solid lines indicate the construction process for FCaps-Emilia, and dashed lines indicate additional processes for FCaps-PSCBase. In the example fine-grained captions, speaker-related traits are highlighted in bold and narrative structure in red. 

cascaded designs compress continuous paralinguis-tic cues into a finite set of discrete tags, introducing an information bottleneck that yields coarse cap-tions and limits fine-grained modeling. In contrast to existing speech style-captioned datasets summa-rized in Table 1, our approach adopts an end-to-end pipeline that avoids these limitations. 

2.2 Contrastive Language–Speech Pre-training 

Contrastive learning has emerged as a powerful paradigm for multimodal pre-training, demonstrat-ing strong performance across image–text (Rad-ford et al., 2021) and audio–text (Elizalde et al., 2023; Wu et al., 2023). In the speech domain, existing speech–text contrastive models are pre-dominantly trained with coarse-grained captions or task-specific supervision, offering limited mod-eling of the temporal and narrative structure of speech. GLAP (Dinkel et al., 2025) learns gen-eral representations across speech, audio, and mu-sic, but relies on paired transcriptions for speech, providing primarily lexical-level supervision. RA-CLAP (Sun et al., 2025) adopts coarse-grained cap-tions. ParaCLAP (Jing et al., 2024) focuses on emotion-centric supervision. Overall, modeling fine-grained and multi-granular speaking styles in a unified manner remains underexplored. 

3 FCaps Dataset Construction 

3.1 Caption Taxonomy: Global and Fine-Grained 

We define two types of textual supervision: • Global captions provide an atemporal, utterance-level description of a speech clip that summarizes speaker-related attributes, encompassing intrinsic traits tied to a speaker’s identity and situational traits that may vary across utterances. Such cap-tions collapse speech into a single holistic de-scription without temporal or narrative structure. • Fine-grained captions extend beyond a holistic speaker profile by explicitly modeling within-utterance temporal dynamics. They provide tem-poral and narrative structure that tracks how vo-cal behaviors evolve over time, including style shifts, prosodic variations, emphasis patterns, and non-verbal vocalizations. Such captions can further encode the speaker’s delivery style, com-municative role, and communicative intent. Together, they provide multi-granular views of the same speech signal, thereby supporting fine-grained contrastive learning of a unified represen-tation across multiple granularities. 

3.2 End-to-End Annotation Pipeline 

Figure 2 illustrates our proposed end-to-end anno-tation pipeline for generating fine-grained speech captions. Given a speech clip as input, the pipeline consists of two processes: detailed caption gener-ation and agentic verification. A multimodal cap-tioner generates multiple candidate captions for the input speech, optionally taking available human-annotated tags. A verification agent then evaluates each candidate using a predefined checklist and a toolbox of specialist tools, and decides whether the candidate is retained or filtered. 4219 Detailed Captioning Detailed captioning, also referred to as detailed perception, aims to gener-ate fine-grained descriptions of an audio or video segment, emphasizing maximal perceptual detail within the clip duration. In this work, we em-ploy Qwen3-Omni-30B-A3B-Captioner 3 (Xu et al., 2025) as the detailed captioner, which produces de-tailed and low-hallucination captions, capturing speaker emotions, layered intentions, cultural con-text, implicit cues, and additionally supports non-speech sound recognition and analysis. Although the captioner is designed to operate without prompting, its default outputs often include spoken-content transcription, environmental sound descriptions, and audio quality assessments, which are irrelevant for speaker-centric contrastive learn-ing. We therefore apply user prompt conditioning to suppress such content. Leveraging the strong instruction-following capability inherited from the base model, the captioner can reliably adhere to these constraints, thereby steering caption genera-tion towards relatively concise and speaker-focused descriptions. A qualitative case study on how dif-ferent prompt compositions influence captioner out-puts is provided in Appendix B. 

Multi-Positive Captioning To construct multi-ple positive textual views of the same speech clip, we perform caption generation multiple times us-ing different random seeds. This yields a set of captions that are all grounded in the same speech signal, while differing in lexical choice, descriptive focus, and narrative structure. Previous work (Jin et al., 2024; Wang et al., 2025a) adopts text-based data augmentation that rewrites captions purely in the textual modality using LLMs with complex in-structions. Such approaches suffer from instruction non-compliance and introduce distorted attributes or hallucinations in a non-trivial fraction of cases, as the rewriting process is not conditioned on the original speech signal. By contrast, our approach conditions the generation process directly on the audio input, producing multiple acoustically consis-tent yet semantically non-identical positive views that are well suited for contrastive learning. A case study is provided in Appendix C. 

Agentic Verification To improve reliability of generated captions, we perform a verification pro-cess using the text-based reasoning model Qwen3-

> 3https://huggingface.co/Qwen/ Qwen3-Omni-30B-A3B-Captioner

30B-A3B-Thinking-2507 4 (Yang et al., 2025a). The verification agent evaluates each candidate caption according to a predefined checklist and dis-cards it if any item in the checklist is violated. The checklist targets common failure modes in detailed captioning by examining whether a caption: (1) includes descriptions of background sounds, en-vironmental noise, or audio quality; (2) contains explicit declarations about the absence of certain elements; (3) contains spoken-content transcrip-tion without attached style descriptions; or (4) fails to appropriately incorporate human-annotated tags when available. In addition, for speech clips from EARS (Richter et al., 2024), Expresso (Nguyen et al., 2023), and VoxCeleb (Nagrani et al., 2017), the agent enforces a clip-level constraint requiring a single speaker with a single role. If a caption indicates multiple speakers or a single speaker as-suming multiple roles, the corresponding speech clip and all associated captions are discarded. To support these judgments, the agent leverages specialist tools, including (1) rule-based pattern matching implemented via Python regular expres-sions, (2) access to the speech transcription, and (3) access to human-annotated tags when available. Based on the aggregated evidence, the agent makes a binary retain-or-filter decision. This agentic veri-fication process enables systematic quality control, effectively eliminating captions containing extrane-ous content or incomplete grounding. 

3.3 FCaps-Emilia 

FCaps-Emilia is constructed from the Emilia cor-pus (He et al., 2024). For each speech segment, the detailed captioner is run five times to generate can-didate fine-grained captions. Given the large scale of the audio sources, the verification agent retains a single verified fine-grained caption per utterance. In total, FCaps-Emilia comprises 18,131,371 fine-grained captions, covering 46,787 hours of speech. FCaps-Emilia does not include global captions. 

3.4 FCaps-PSCBase 

FCaps-PSCBase is built upon the PSC-Base cor-pus (Diwan et al., 2025), incorporating audio clips from EARS, Expresso, and VoxCeleb, along with additional human-annotated tags and captions. We adopt the captions provided by PSC-Base as global captions and apply rule-based normalization to mit-igate common artifacts arising from LLM rewrit-

> 4https://huggingface.co/Qwen/ Qwen3-30B-A3B-Thinking-2507

4220 ing and fuzzy matching to correct spelling errors. We incorporate speaking rate, accent, and situa-tional tags to guide fine-grained caption generation. For each utterance, the detailed captioner is run 20 times to obtain candidate fine-grained captions. After agentic verification, between 5 and 14 veri-fied captions per utterance are retained as multi-positive views. Overall, FCaps-PSCBase com-prises 140,602 global captions and 930,917 fine-grained captions, spanning 267 hours of speech. 

4 CLSP Model 

4.1 Model Architecture 

As shown in Figure 3, CLSP adopts the dual-encoder architecture of CLAP, where speech and text are processed by separate encoders, followed by MLP projection to map two modalities into a shared embedding space. 

Speech and Audio Unified Encoder SPEAR-XLarge 5 is used as the speech and audio unified encoder, with representations extracted from the final encoder layer. SPEAR (Yang et al., 2025c) is a unified self-supervised representation model for both speech and general audio, and achieves state-of-the-art performance across a range of speech and audio benchmarks, making it well-suited for capturing fine-grained acoustic and paralinguistic cues in speaker-centric contrastive learning. 

Text Encoder RoBERTa-base 6 (Liu et al., 2019) is used as the text encoder, with variable-length inputs up to 512 tokens to accommodate captions of varying granularity. The sentence-level repre-sentation is taken from the final-layer [CLS] token. 

4.2 Fine-Grained and Multi-Granular Contrastive Language–Speech Pre-training 

We adopt a two-stage curriculum for speech–text representation learning with fine-grained and multi-granular contrastive supervision. The training fo-cus progressively shifts from pure fine-grained alignment to a balance between cross-granularity generalization and robust fine-grained discrimina-tion. In the first stage, speech and text are aligned using standard contrastive learning on large-scale data paired with fine-grained captions. In the sec-ond stage, we introduce multi-positive contrastive 

> 5https://huggingface.co/marcoyang/ spear-xlarge-speech-audio
> 6https://huggingface.co/FacebookAI/ roberta-base
> Figure 3: Overview of CLSP.

learning with diverse global and fine-grained cap-tions at multiple granularities. We provide ablation studies on multi-stage training in Appendix G.1. 

Stage One Given a speech clip x and its paired tokenized fine-grained caption yF, the speech en-coder produces frame-level representations that are aggregated via mean pooling over time, followed by MLP projection and ℓ2 normalization to obtain a speech embedding s ∈ Rd. For text, we take the final-layer [CLS] hidden state from the text encoder, followed by an MLP projection and ℓ2

normalization to obtain a text embedding tF ∈ Rd.Here, d is the embedding space dimensionality. We use a symmetric InfoNCE (He et al., 2020) loss, with each paired speech and text forming a positive example, and all other non-matching pairs within the same batch serving as negatives: 

L = − 12N

> N

∑

> i=1

(

log exp( si · tFi/τ )

∑Nj=1 exp( si · tFj /τ )+ log exp( tFi · si/τ )

∑Nj=1 exp( tFi · sj /τ )

)

, (1) where N is the batch size and τ is a learnable tem-perature. Since all embeddings are ℓ2-normalized, dot products are equivalent to cosine similarity. 

Stage Two We adopt a symmetric multi-positive InfoNCE loss, implemented as cross-entropy with soft targets. Given a batch of N speech samples 

{xi}Ni=1 , each paired with two tokenized captions 

{yi, ˆyi}, we obtain a speech embedding si ∈ Rd

and two text embeddings ti, ˆti ∈ Rd in the same manner as in Stage One. We stack the speech em-beddings as S = [ s1, . . . , sN ] ∈ RN ×d and the text embeddings as T = [ t1, . . . , tN , ˆt1, . . . , ˆtN ] ∈4221 R2N ×d, and compute the similarity logits L =

ST ⊤ ∈ RN ×2N . For audio-to-text direction, we define a soft target distribution D ∈ RN ×2N that assigns probability mass λ and 1 − λ to two paired texts, and zero to all others: 

Di,j =



λ, if j = i, 

1 − λ, if j = i + N, 

0, otherwise .

(2) We set λ = 0 .5 based on the ablation study reported in Appendix G.2. For text-to-audio direction, each text embedding has a single speech, yielding target distribution D′ ∈ R2N ×N :

D′ 

> j,i

=

{

1, if j = i or j = i + N, 

0, otherwise . (3) The loss is defined as the average of two directions: 

L = 12

(

CE (L/τ, D) + CE (L⊤/τ, D′))

, (4) where CE( ·, ·) denotes cross-entropy and τ is a learnable temperature parameter. For each training step, the model samples one of two tasks according to a task scheduler: • Task 1 : each speech sample is paired with a global caption and a fine-grained caption, encour-aging cross-granularity generalization. • Task 2 : each speech sample is paired with two distinct fine-grained captions, improving fine-grained discrimination via semantic consistency. We explore both static and dynamic task schedulers. At training step t, Task 1 is sampled with proba-bility pt, while Task 2 is sampled with probability 

1 − pt. For the static scheduler, pt = p0 is fixed. For the dynamic scheduler, pt decreases linearly from p0 to pmin over T training steps and remains fixed thereafter: 

pt = max 

(

pmin , p 0 − tT (p0 − pmin )

)

. (5) The best-performing strategy uses a dynamic sched-uler with p0 = 0.95 , pmin = 0.50 , and T =10 ,000 . We provide ablation studies of different task schedulers in Appendix G.3. 

5 Experiments 

5.1 Annotation Quality of FCaps Evaluation Setup We evaluate the annotation quality of FCaps by comparing captions generated           

> Table 2: Comparison of end-to-end and cascaded cap-tion annotations evaluated by Gemini 3 Pro.
> Pipeline Correctness Coverage Naturalness Avg.
> Cascaded 3.30 ±0.05 3.10 ±0.02 4.15 ±0.05 3.51 ±0.04
> End-to-end 4.42 ±0.04 4.55 ±0.03 4.92 ±0.02 4.63 ±0.03

by our end-to-end annotation pipeline with those produced by a representative cascaded annotation pipeline. Specifically, we randomly sample 1,000 audio clips from FCaps-Emilia along with one cap-tion per audio generated by our end-to-end pipeline. For the same set of audio clips, we obtain the corre-sponding captions from PSC-Scaled (Diwan et al., 2025) as the cascaded baseline, which consists of automatically predicted discrete style labels, fil-tered by Gemini 1.5 Flash (Reid et al., 2024), and rewritten into natural-language style captions by Mistral-7B-Instruct-v0.2 (Jiang et al., 2023). 

LLM-as-Judges We use gemini-3-pro-preview, a natively multimodal LLM (Team, 2025), as a judge to evaluate caption quality. Each evaluation query consists of an audio clip and its two corre-sponding captions (cascaded vs. end-to-end), and assigns absolute scores to each caption along three dimensions: (1) audio-grounded correctness , mea-suring factual consistency with the audible con-tent; (2) coverage , assessing whether speaking-style attributes are adequately captured; and (3) nat-uralness , evaluating fluency, grammaticality, and human-likeness. All evaluations follow an identical prompt and scoring rubric, detailed in Appendix D. Scores are averaged over five runs with randomized ordering to reduce variance. 

Results Table 2 reports Gemini 3 Pro scores for cascaded and end-to-end caption annotations. Our end-to-end annotations consistently outper-form cascaded annotations across all three dimen-sions by a large margin. Figure 4 further shows that end-to-end captions outperform cascaded cap-tions in the majority of cases across all evaluation dimensions, with especially large gains in cover-age and correctness. These gaps highlight the in-formation bottleneck introduced by intermediate discrete attributes in cascaded pipelines, which irre-versibly compress rich paralinguistic information. By contrast, our end-to-end pipeline yields better alignment with the audible content, more compre-hensive coverage of speaking-style attributes, and more fluent, human-like descriptions. 4222 Table 3: Global speech–text retrieval and fine-grained speech–text retrieval results. Baselines are evaluated using public checkpoints. Best results are in bold .                                                                         

> System Speech-to-Text Text-to-Speech
> R@1 R@5 R@10 mAP@10 R@1 R@5 R@10 mAP@10
> Global Speech–Text Retrieval
> LAION-AI CLAP (Wu et al., 2023) 0.4 2.5 5.4 1.5 0.8 3.3 5.0 1.9 GLAP (Dinkel et al., 2025) 1.7 5.0 9.5 3.4 1.7 5.8 10.8 3.9 ParaCLAP (Jing et al., 2024) 2.1 4.6 9.1 3.5 0.4 5.0 7.9 2.3 CLSP 45.6 75.9 84.2 58.7 40.3 74.3 82.6 54.5
> Fine-Grained Speech–Text Retrieval
> LAION-AI CLAP (Wu et al., 2023) 0.4 3.3 5.4 1.6 1.2 2.5 2.9 1.7 GLAP (Dinkel et al., 2025) 4.6 14.5 21.2 9.1 2.1 7.5 13.3 4.4 ParaCLAP (Jing et al., 2024) 1.2 7.9 12.5 4.1 1.2 5.8 10.0 3.3 CLSP 68.1 90.9 95.9 77.9 67.2 90.9 96.3 77.2

Table 4: Zero-shot classification results, reported as WA (%) / UA (%). † indicates results taken from prior work; the others are evaluated using public checkpoints. Best results are in bold .                                                              

> System Emotion Emotion Emotion Gender Age
> IEMOCAP RAVDESS CREMA-D RAVDESS CREMA-D LAION-AI CLAP (Wu et al., 2023) 32.6 / 29.1 14.4 / 13.5 21.0 / 19.2 58.6 / 58.6 1.3 / 1.8 GLAP (Dinkel et al., 2025) 32.5 / 27.0 7.8 / 13.0 13.6 / 17.9 72.6 / 72.6 27.1 / 32.6 ParaCLAP (Jing et al., 2024) 46.1 / 46.5 28.1 / 30.3 29.8 / 29.6 99.2 / 99.2 31.2 / 32.0 Auden-Voice CLAP (Huo et al., 2025) †–/–32.4 / –30.2 / –95.6 / –38.5 / –CLSP 57.2 /56.1 46.8 /46.0 35.1 /37.2 100.0 /100.0 40.6 /44.5 Correctness 72% 13% 15%
> Coverage 86% 6% 8%
> Naturalness 54% 41% 5%
> better tie worse

Figure 4: Pairwise comparison between end-to-end and cascaded captions across correctness, coverage, and nat-uralness dimensions, showing the proportions of better, tied, and worse cases under Gemini 3 Pro evaluation. 

5.2 CLSP as a Speech Task Evaluator 5.2.1 Implementation Details 

CLSP has 724M parameters in total, with 599M from SPEAR-XLarge and 125M from RoBERTa-base, trained on 8 NVIDIA A100 80GB GPUs, with a batch duration of 800 seconds per GPU. The first stage runs for 1.2M steps, followed by 4k fine-tuning steps for the second stage, using ScaledAdam (Yao et al., 2024) optimizer and Eden (Yao et al., 2024) scheduler with peak learn-ing rates of 0.045 and 0.001, respectively. 

5.2.2 Speech–Text Retrieval: Global and Fine-Grained Evaluation Setup We construct our test set using 241 audio clips from the ParaSpeechCaps test (Di-wan et al., 2025) split, with durations ranging from 1 to 30 seconds, ensuring no overlap between train-ing and test sets. Global captions are derived from the PSC-Base holdout split, and fine-grained cap-tions are generated by our end-to-end pipeline. 

Evaluation Metrics We use standard metrics, in-cluding Recall at rank 1/5/10 (R@1, R@5, R@10) and mean Average Precision at 10 (mAP@10). R@ k measures the proportion of queries whose correct match appears in the top-k, while mAP@10 measures ranking quality within the top 10. 

Baselines As the proposed tasks are novel, we evaluate representative open-source audio–text re-trieval models, including LAION-AI CLAP (Wu et al., 2023), GLAP (Dinkel et al., 2025), and Par-aCLAP (Jing et al., 2024), which are pre-trained on coarse-grained or task-specific supervision with-out fine-grained captions supervision. These mod-els therefore serve to quantify the capability gap between existing approaches and our fine-grained modeling framework. Detailed descriptions of the baseline systems are provided in Appendix A. 

Results Table 3 reports retrieval performance on both global and fine-grained tasks. Across all set-tings, CLSP consistently outperforms all baselines by a large margin across all evaluation metrics 4223 Table 5: The correlation between the model-derived similarity scores and subjective MOS. Reported as Pearson / Spearman / Kendall’s Tau correlation coefficients ( r, ρ, τ ). All results are statistically significant with p < 0.01 .                           

> System Intrinsic Traits Situational Traits Fusion
> LAION-AI CLAP (Wu et al., 2023) 0.679 / 0.664 / 0.467 0.194 / 0.184 / 0.126 0.588 / 0.597 / 0.425 GLAP (Dinkel et al., 2025) 0.372 / 0.340 / 0.234 0.169 / 0.138 / 0.102 0.350 / 0.344 / 0.241 ParaCLAP (Jing et al., 2024) 0.663 / 0.634 / 0.445 0.323 / 0.330 / 0.232 0.626 / 0.599 / 0.417 CLSP 0.893 /0.858 /0.668 0.903 /0.878 /0.694 0.886 /0.858 /0.670

for both speech-to-text and text-to-speech retrieval, while the baselines perform close to random guess-ing. This substantial margin highlights the capabil-ity gap between existing models and CLSP, and un-derscores the effectiveness of training with global and fine-grained captions from FCaps. 

5.2.3 Zero-shot Paralinguistic Classification Evaluation Setup This task evaluates CLSP’s ability to recognize paralinguistic attributes un-der diverse attribute sets, without any task-specific training. We focus on three representative par-alinguistic dimensions: emotion , gender , and age .For each dimension, zero-shot classification is per-formed by computing the cosine similarity be-tween a speech embedding and a set of natural-language text prompts describing candidates (e.g., “A speaker in a happy tone.”, “A male speaker.”, and “A middle-aged speaker.”), and selecting the prompt with the highest similarity. Our evaluations contain the following datasets: • IEMOCAP (Busso et al., 2008): We use the 4-class emotion setup (happy/excited, angry, sad, neutral) with a total of 5,531 utterances. • RAVDESS (Livingstone and Russo, 2018): We use the speech part with 1,440 utterances, 8-class emotion categories (calm, happy, sad, angry, fear-ful, surprise, disgust, and neutral), and gender. • CREMA-D (Cao et al., 2014): 7,442 utterances from 91 actors, with 6-class emotion categories (happy, sad, angry, fear, disgust, neutral) and speaker age, which we grouped into four bins (child, young adult, middle-aged, older). 

Evaluation Metrics We report weighted accu-racy (WA) and unweighted accuracy (UA), measur-ing overall and mean class accuracy, respectively. 

Baselines We compare CLSP with strong base-lines, including LAION-AI CLAP, GLAP, Para-CLAP, and Auden-Voice CLAP. For Auden-Voice CLAP, we use the ASR-pretrained variant without any supervised training on IEMOCAP, RAVDESS, or CREMA-D, ensuring strictly zero-shot evalua-tion. Baseline details are provided in Appendix A. 

Results Table 4 reports zero-shot paralinguistic classification results on emotion, gender, and age recognition. Overall, CLSP consistently outper-forms all baselines across datasets and paralinguis-tic dimensions. These results indicate that CLSP learns generalizable speech representations that capture diverse paralinguistic semantics without task-specific supervision. 

5.2.4 Speech Style Similarity Scoring with Human Correlation Subjective Evaluation Setup To validate the re-liability of CLSP as an automated metric for as-sessing speech-text alignment, we investigate its consistency with human perception for three dis-tinct paralinguistic dimensions. We conduct a meta-evaluation using the holdout split of ParaSpeech-Caps. The evaluation focuses on Intrinsic Traits ,

Situational Traits , and their Fusion .For human annotations, we recruited 20 experts with research backgrounds in speech processing to rate the matching degree between the audio and its corresponding text caption on a continuous scale. We then calculate the correlation between these subjective scores and model-predicted similarity scores across several baselines, using three stan-dard statistical coefficients: the Pearson Correla-tion Coefficient ( r), Spearman’s Rank Correlation (ρ), and Kendall’s Tau ( τ ). Details of the subjective evaluation are provided in Appendix E. 

Baselines We continue to use open-source repre-sentative audio-text models, including LAION-AI CLAP, GLAP, and ParaCLAP as baseline systems. 

Results The experimental results, as summarized in Table 5, demonstrate that CLSP significantly outperforms all baseline models in mirroring hu-man perception across both intrinsic and situational traits, as well as their fusion. Furthermore, the con-sistent performance across all evaluated metrics (r, ρ, and τ ) confirms that CLSP not only tracks 4224 the absolute semantic matching quality linearly but also effectively preserves the relative ordinal rank-ing of samples in a manner that resonates with human expert judgment. In conclusion, these re-sults validate CLSP as a robust and high-fidelity automated proxy for human subjective evaluation in paralinguistic audio-text matching tasks. For a more intuitive assessment, visual comparisons high-lighting the strong concordance between model-predicted similarity scores and human subjective ratings are provided in Appendix F. 

Discussion The strong alignment with human judgments suggests that CLSP can serve not only as a representation model but also as a human-aligned automatic metric (Yang et al., 2026a,b) for speech generation tasks. In particular, it naturally mea-sures the capability of instruction-following TTS systems (Yang et al., 2024), where the goal is to generate speech that matches a natural language style prompt. Compared to LLM-as-a-judge ap-proaches (Wang et al., 2025c,b, 2026), which rely on large audio language models and incur high computational cost, CLSP provides a scalable and practical alternative, making it well-suited for large-scale benchmarking and speech data filtering. 

6 Conclusion 

In this paper, we introduce FCaps, the largest speech dataset paired with fine-grained free-text speaking-style descriptions, together with CLSP, which learns fine-grained speech–text representa-tions across multiple stylistic granularities. Ex-tensive experiments demonstrate that CLSP per-forms reliably across a range of tasks, including global and fine-grained speech–text retrieval, zero-shot paralinguistic classification, and speech style similarity scoring that aligns strongly with hu-man judgments. We hope this work encourages a shift in speaking style modeling from predefined, discrete attributes toward open-vocabulary, cross-granular, and speech-grounded natural language descriptions, facilitating more flexible and general-purpose speech–language representations. 

Limitations 

While our approach demonstrates strong perfor-mance across a range of tasks, it has several limi-tations. First, CLSP relies on a pre-trained speech and audio unified encoder that is trained only on English speech, and therefore our model is limited to English. Second, publicly available paralinguis-tic speech data with diverse style attributes remains limited, particularly in its coverage of underrepre-sented accents, emotional expressions, and expres-sive speaking styles. We leave extensions toward more diverse and multilingual speech representa-tions as an important direction for future work. 

Ethics Statement 

All data used in this work were collected and pro-cessed in accordance with relevant ethical guide-lines and licensing terms. Human annotations were performed by trained annotators, who were fairly compensated. For FCaps, the speech samples are sourced from publicly available datasets. We re-lease only annotated captions and associated meta-data referencing the original audio under the CC BY-NC-SA 4.0 license and do not redistribute the original audio files. CLSP is made publicly avail-able under the Apache 2.0 license to support repro-ducibility and facilitate future research. 

Acknowledgments 

This work was supported by the National Natural Science Foundation of China (No. U23B2018), Shanghai Municipal Science and Technology Major Project under Grant 2021SHZDZX0102, Yangtze River Delta Science and Technology Innovation Community Joint Research Project (2024CSJGG1100), and CIE-Tencent Doctoral Re-search Incentive Project. 

References     

> Carlos Busso, Murtaza Bulut, Chi-Chun Lee, and oth-ers. 2008. IEMOCAP: interactive emotional dyadic motion capture database. Lang. Resour. Evaluation ,42(4):335–359. Houwei Cao, David G. Cooper, Michael K. Keutmann, and others. 2014. CREMA-D: crowd-sourced emo-tional multimodal actors dataset. IEEE Trans. Affect. Comput. , 5(4):377–390. Joon Son Chung, Arsha Nagrani, and Andrew Zisser-man. 2018. VoxCeleb2: Deep speaker recognition. In Proc. Interspeech , Hyderabad. Gheorghe Comanici, Eric Bieber, Mike Schaekermann, and others. 2025. Gemini 2.5: Pushing the fron-tier with advanced reasoning, multimodality, long context, and next generation agentic capabilities.
> Preprint , arXiv:2507.06261.

4225 Heinrich Dinkel, Zhiyong Yan, Tianzi Wang, and oth-ers. 2025. GLAP: general contrastive audio-text pre-training across domains and languages. Preprint ,arXiv:2506.11350. Anuj Diwan, Zhisheng Zheng, David Harwath, and Eu-nsol Choi. 2025. Scaling rich style-prompted text-to-speech datasets. In Proc. EMNLP , Suzhou. Benjamin Elizalde, Soham Deshmukh, Mahmoud Al Ismail, and Huaming Wang. 2023. CLAP learning audio concepts from natural language supervision. In 

Proc. ICASSP , Rhodes Island. Zhifang Guo, Yichong Leng, Yihan Wu, and others. 2023. PromptTTS: controllable text-to-speech with text descriptions. In Proc. ICASSP , Rhodes Island. Jiarui Hai, Karan Thakkar, Helin Wang, and others. 2024. DreamVoice: Text-guided voice conversion. In Proc. Interspeech , Kos Island. Haorui He, Zengqiang Shang, Chaoren Wang, and oth-ers. 2024. Emilia: An extensive, multilingual, and diverse speech dataset for large-scale speech genera-tion. In Proc. SLT , Macao. Kaiming He, Haoqi Fan, Yuxin Wu, and others. 2020. Momentum contrast for unsupervised visual repre-sentation learning. In Proc. CVPR , Seattle. Mingyue Huo, Wei-Cheng Tseng, Yiwen Shao, and others. 2025. Auden-Voice: General-purpose voice encoder for speech and language understanding. 

Preprint , arXiv:2511.15145. Shengpeng Ji, Qian Chen, Wen Wang, and others. 2025. ControlSpeech: Towards simultaneous and indepen-dent zero-shot speaker cloning and zero-shot lan-guage style control. In Proc. ACL , Vienna. Shengpeng Ji, Jialong Zuo, Minghui Fang, and others. 2024. Textrolspeech: A text style control speech corpus with codec language text-to-speech models. In Proc. ICASSP , Seoul. Albert Q. Jiang, Alexandre Sablayrolles, Arthur Men-sch, and others. 2023. Mistral 7b. Preprint ,arXiv:2310.06825. Zeyu Jin, Jia Jia, Qixin Wang, and others. 2024. SpeechCraft: A fine-grained expressive speech dataset with natural language description. In Proc. ACM MM , Melbourne. Xin Jing, Andreas Triantafyllopoulos, and Björn Schuller. 2024. ParaCLAP – towards a general language-audio model for computational paralinguis-tic tasks. In Proc. Interspeech , Kos Island. Masaya Kawamura, Ryuichi Yamamoto, Yuma Shira-hata, and others. 2024. LibriTTS-P: A corpus with speaking style and speaker identity prompts for text-to-speech and style captioning. In Proc. Interspeech ,Kos Island. Yuma Koizumi, Heiga Zen, Shigeki Karita, and others. 2023. LibriTTS-R: A restored multi-speaker text-to-speech corpus. In Proc. Interspeech , Dublin. Yinhan Liu, Myle Ott, Naman Goyal, and others. 2019. RoBERTa: A robustly optimized BERT pretraining approach. Preprint , arXiv:1907.11692. Steven R Livingstone and Frank A Russo. 2018. The ryerson audio-visual database of emotional speech and song (RAVDESS): A dynamic, multimodal set of facial and vocal expressions in north american english. PloS one , 13(5):e0196391. Dan Lyth and Simon King. 2024. Natural language guid-ance of high-fidelity text-to-speech with synthetic annotations. Preprint , arXiv:2402.01912. Ziyang Ma, Zhisheng Zheng, Jiaxin Ye, and others. 2024. emotion2vec: Self-supervised pre-training for speech emotion representation. In Proc. ACL ,Bangkok. Arsha Nagrani, Joon Son Chung, and Andrew Zisser-man. 2017. VoxCeleb: A large-scale speaker identifi-cation dataset. In Proc. Interspeech , Stockholm. Tu Anh Nguyen, Wei-Ning Hsu, Antony D’Avirro, and others. 2023. Expresso: A benchmark and analysis of discrete expressive speech resynthesis. In Proc. Interspeech , Dublin. OpenAI. 2024a. Gpt-4 technical report. Preprint ,arXiv:2303.08774. OpenAI. 2024b. GPT-4o system card. Preprint ,arXiv:2410.21276. Alec Radford, Jong Wook Kim, Chris Hallacy, and oth-ers. 2021. Learning transferable visual models from natural language supervision. In ICML .Machel Reid, Nikolay Savinov, Denis Teplyashin, and others. 2024. Gemini 1.5: Unlocking multimodal understanding across millions of tokens of context. 

Preprint , arXiv:2403.05530. Julius Richter, Yi-Chiao Wu, Steven Krenn, and others. 2024. EARS: an anechoic fullband speech dataset benchmarked for speech enhancement and derever-beration. In Proc. Interspeech , Kos Island. Haoqin Sun, Jingguang Tian, Jiaming Zhou, and oth-ers. 2025. RA-CLAP: relation-augmented emotional speaking style contrastive language-audio pretraining for speech retrieval. In Proc. Interspeech , Rotterdam. Gemini Team. 2025. Gemini: A family of highly capa-ble multimodal models. Preprint , arXiv:2312.11805. Helin Wang, Jiarui Hai, Dading Chong, and others. 2025a. CapSpeech: enabling downstream appli-cations in style-captioned text-to-speech. Preprint ,arXiv:2506.02863. 4226 Hui Wang, Jinghua Zhao, Yifan Yang, and others. 2026. SpeechLLM-as-Judges: towards general and inter-pretable speech quality evaluation. In Proc. ACL ,San Diego. Siyin Wang, Wenyi Yu, Xianzhao Chen, and others. 2025b. QualiSpeech: A speech quality assessment dataset with natural language reasoning and descrip-tions. In Proc. ACL , Vienna. Siyin Wang, Wenyi Yu, Yudong Yang, and others. 2025c. Enabling auditory large language models for auto-matic speech quality evaluation. In Proc. ICASSP ,Hyderabad. Yusong Wu, Ke Chen, Tianyu Zhang, and others. 2023. Large-scale contrastive language-audio pretraining with feature fusion and keyword-to-caption augmen-tation. In Proc. ICASSP , Rhodes Island. Jin Xu, Zhifang Guo, Hangrui Hu, and others. 2025. Qwen3-omni technical report. Preprint ,arXiv:2509.17765. An Yang, Anfeng Li, Baosong Yang, and oth-ers. 2025a. Qwen3 technical report. Preprint ,arXiv:2505.09388. Dongchao Yang, Songxiang Liu, Rongjie Huang, and others. 2024. InstructTTS: Modelling expressive TTS in discrete latent space with natural language style prompt. IEEE/ACM Transactions on Audio, Speech, and Language Processing , 32:2913–2925. Guanrou Yang, Chen Yang, Qian Chen, and others. 2025b. EmoVoice: LLM-based emotional text-to-speech model with freestyle text prompting. In Proc. ACM MM , Dublin. Xiaoyu Yang, Yifan Yang, Zengrui Jin, and others. 2025c. SPEAR: A unified SSL framework for learn-ing speech and audio representations. Preprint ,arXiv:2510.25955. Yifan Yang, Bing Han, Hui Wang, and others. 2026a. Measuring prosody diversity in zero-shot tts: Anew metric, benchmark, and exploration. In Proc. ICASSP , Barcelona. Yifan Yang, Hui Wang, Bing Han, and others. 2026b. Position: Towards responsible evaluation for text-to-speech. Preprint , arXiv:2510.06927. Zengwei Yao, Liyong Guo, Xiaoyu Yang, and others. 2024. Zipformer: A faster and better encoder for au-tomatic speech recognition. In Proc. ICLR , Vienna. 

A Baseline Details 

• LAION-AI CLAP (Wu et al., 2023): An open-source 7 CLIP-style dual-encoder model with 158M parameters. The audio encoder uses pre-trained HTSAT-tiny, with audio representations 

> 7https://github.com/LAION-AI/CLAP

extracted from the penultimate layer before pro-jection. The text encoder uses RoBERTa-base, with text representation taken from the final-layer [CLS] token. LAION-AI CLAP is trained on large-scale audio-text paired data, including Au-dioCaps, Clotho, and the LAION-Audio-630K dataset. Training uses bidirectional contrastive learning with a symmetric cross-entropy loss. • GLAP (Dinkel et al., 2025): An open-source 8

dual-encoder CLAP-style model with 855M pa-rameters that aims to learn unified audio-text representations across speech, sound, and music domains. GLAP employs a pre-trained general-purpose audio encoder and a multilingual text encoder based on Sonar for text representations. GLAP is trained on large-scale audio-text paired data spanning speech (439.4M, 411k hours), sound (5.9M, 23.8k hours), and music (3k, 19.3 hours). Training uses a bidirectional contrastive objective based on a sigmoid loss. • ParaCLAP (Jing et al., 2024): An open-source 9

dual-encoder CLAP-style model with 276M pa-rameters. The speech encoder is initialized from a pruned version of Wav2Vec2-Large-Robust that has been further fine-tuned for dimensional speech emotion recognition on MSP-Podcast. Audio representations are obtained by pooling the hidden states of the final Transformer layer. The text encoder is bert-base-uncased, and the text representation is taken from the final-layer [CLS] token. ParaCLAP is trained on the MSP-Podcast dataset, which contains nine emotion cat-egories, utilizing bidirectional contrastive learn-ing with a symmetric cross-entropy loss. • Auden-Voice CLAP (Huo et al., 2025): A dual-encoder CLAP-style model with 281M param-eters, which remains closed-source at the time of submission. The speech encoder is initial-ized from an ASR-pretrained Zipformer-L en-coder trained on large-scale in-house Chinese ASR data using the RNNT loss. Audio represen-tations are obtained by mean-pooling the hidden states of the final Transformer layer. The text en-coder is RoBERTa-base, and text representations are taken from the final-layer [CLS] token. Dif-ferent continual pre-training settings are applied starting from the ASR-pretrained encoder, includ-ing speaker identification trained on VoxCeleb2 

> 8https://github.com/xiaomi-research/ dasheng-glap
> 9https://github.com/KeiKinn/ParaCLAP

4227 (974k utterances and 2,026 hours), paralinguis-tic attribute prediction trained on CREMA-D, RAVDESS, IEMOCAP, and TESS (18.3k utter-ances and 20 hours), and a multi-task setting combining speaker identification and paralinguis-tic tasks. Encoders obtained from each setting are used to initialize different CLAP variants, which are further trained on ParaSpeechCaps using both PSC-Base and PSC-Scaled splits (1.036M audio-text pairs, 2,700 hours) with bidirectional speech– text contrastive learning. 

B Case Study: User Prompt Composition for Fine-Grained Caption Generation 

This case study qualitatively examines how differ-ent user prompt compositions influence the fine-grained captions generated by Qwen3-Omni-30B-A3B-Captioner. 

Setup We compare three prompt compositions: • Audio-only : The captioner takes audio as input and generates captions in its default manner. • Audio + User Prompt (w/o Tags) : A user prompt (Figure 7) is used to discourage spoken-content transcription, environment-related de-scriptions, and audio quality assessments. • Audio + User Prompt (w/ Tags) : A user prompt with human-annotated attributes (Figure 8) is used to guide caption generation toward accu-rate realization of specified attributes, especially those that are rare or inherently ambiguous when inferred from audio alone. 

Analysis As shown in Table 6, different prompt compositions lead to distinct captioning behaviors. • When no user prompt is applied, the generated caption includes spoken-content transcription, de-tailed descriptions of environmental background noise, audio quality assessments, speculative mentions of editing artifacts and electronic tones, as well as explicit declarations about the absence of certain elements, all highlighted in red. Such speaker-independent and verbose content can dis-tract contrastive learning from speaker-centric representations, encouraging reliance on shal-low lexical cues from verbatim transcription or recording-specific artifacts. • Introducing a lightweight user prompt results in a more concise and speaker-focused caption. How-ever, the inferred accent remains coarse, high-lighted in red, reflecting the intrinsic ambigu-ity of accent identification from short speech segments, where many regional accents exhibit highly similar acoustic patterns and are difficult to reliably distinguish based on audio alone. • When human-annotated attributes are addition-ally provided, the specified accent can be realized accurately in the generated caption, highlighted in green. The resulting description not only re-flects the correct accent but also maintains a co-herent temporal structure that captures changes in speaking style and delivery. Overall, this comparison illustrates how human annotations can resolve ambiguity in inherently hard-to-delineate speaker traits, while preserving the narrative nature of fine-grained captions. 

C Case Study: Multi-Positive Caption Generation 

Analysis Table 7 presents multiple fine-grained captions generated for the same speech clip us-ing different random seeds. All captions consis-tently capture core speaker attributes, including gender, accent, and broadly similar pitch range and speaking rate, indicating that they remain well grounded in the same underlying speech signal. At the same time, the captions exhibit notable varia-tion in lexical choice, descriptive emphasis, and narrative structure. Some emphasize overall deliv-ery style and speaker demeanor, while others de-scribe within-utterance dynamics such as changes in pace, pauses, or shifts in intonation. Together, these captions constitute multiple semantically non-identical textual views of the same speech. 

D Detailed Protocol of LLM-as-Judges 

The LLM-as-Judges evaluation follows three cri-teria, each assessed using a five-level rubric that specifies both failure modes and ideal behaviors, as detailed in Figure 9. 

E Details of Subjective Evaluation 

Evaluation Data Selection To validate whether CLSP scores align with human perception, we con-duct a meta-evaluation using the evaluation set of ParaSpeechCaps. This dataset contains diverse au-dio samples paired with style descriptions covering two key paralinguistic dimensions: • Intrinsic Speaker Traits: Speaker characteristics tied to a speaker’s identity, such as gender, age, timbre/texture, pitch, accent, and so on. 4228 Table 6: Case study of different user prompt compositions and corresponding generated fine-grained captions. 

User Prompt Composition Fine-grained Caption 

Audio-only The audio clip begins abruptly, mid-sentence, as a male speaker with a distinct Afro-Caribbean accent continues a thought: “. . . of of the idea that has been the same idea for a thousand years that they believe that—”. His delivery is measured and analytical, marked by a slight hesitation and repetition at the start, indicating an unscripted, conversational tone. The speaker’s voice is steady, low-to-mid in pitch, and slightly gravelly, with clear articulation and no signs of emotional distress or heightened affect. The environment is quiet, featuring only a faint electronic hum and minimal room reverberation, pointing to a small, acoustically treated indoor setting such as a home studio or office. The recording is of high technical quality, with no distortion or background interference, and the speaker’s voice is captured close to the microphone, ensuring clarity and intelligibility. At the moment the speaker is about to elaborate further, the audio is abruptly cut off, truncating his final word and leaving the thought incomplete. This sudden interruption is accompanied by a sharp, digital click, characteristic of a hard edit or technical error, and is immediately followed by a brief, high-frequency electronic tone. The tone is static and unchanging, likely the result of a digital artifact from the editing process, and is not part of the original speech. No other sounds—such as music, ambient noise, or environmental cues—are present, and the absence of audience reactions or other voices indicates a solitary recording context. In summary, the clip features a single, articulate male speaker with a Caribbean accent discussing a persistent, long-standing idea in an unembellished, contemplative manner. The audio is clear and focused, set in a quiet, private environment, and is abruptly interrupted by a technical edit, which introduces a digital click and an electronic tone, cutting off the speaker mid-sentence and leaving the discussion unresolved. Audio + User Prompt w/o Tags A male speaker with a medium-low pitched, slightly gravelly voice and a non-native English accent delivers a slow, deliberate, and thoughtful statement. His speech is marked by a slight repetition at the beginning and pauses between phrases, with a steady, calm, and measured pace. The intonation is even and declarative, conveying a sense of reflection and certainty, as if presenting a considered opinion or fact. Audio + User Prompt w/ Tags A mature male with a clear, medium-low pitched voice and a Jamaican accent speaks in a measured, deliberate manner. He begins with a slightly rushed, emphatic tone and a moderate pitch, conveying a sense of conviction. After a short pause, he continues at a steady, thoughtful pace with a slightly lower pitch and a more subdued, reflective tone. The speech is delivered at a moderate volume with a controlled, conversational delivery. 

Table 7: Case study of multi-positive caption generation for the same speech clip using different random seeds. 

Seed Fine-grained Caption 

1 A middle-aged male with a clear, medium-pitched voice and an Australian accent speaks in a conversational, explanatory tone. His speech is delivered at a fast, steady pace, with a moderate volume and smooth, fluid articulation. The intonation is relatively flat and consistent, conveying a matter-of-fact, informative style. 2 A male speaker with a medium-low pitched, resonant voice and an Australian accent speaks in a measured, deliberate manner. His delivery is calm and conversational, with a steady rhythm and even pacing, using a moderate volume and a flat, unemotional tone. 3 A mature male with a clear, medium-pitched voice and an Australian accent speaks in a conversational, informal style. He begins at a fast, energetic pace with an emphatic, high pitch and moderately loud volume, using a casual, slightly breathy tone. After a brief pause, he continues at a steady, conversational pace with a moderate pitch and volume, his tone remaining expressive and fluctuating throughout the fluent delivery. 4 A mature male with a medium-low pitched, resonant voice and a distinct Australian accent speaks in a measured, confident manner. His delivery is steady and deliberate, with a moderate speaking rate and clear articulation. The tone is calm and conversational, suggesting an explanatory or persuasive intent. He maintains a consistent volume and pitch, with subtle inflections that convey a sense of authority and familiarity. 5 A mature male with a clear, medium-pitched voice and an Australian accent speaks in a conversational, explanatory style, similar to a commentator or analyst. He begins with a moderate pace and clear enunciation, using a mid-to-low pitch that rises slightly for emphasis. After a short pause, he continues at a slightly faster pace with a more declarative tone, and his pitch drops again as he concludes with a downward inflection, maintaining a steady, conversational delivery throughout. 4229 Figure 5: Annotation UI for raters to annotate the alignment score between one audio and several candidate captions. 

• Situational Traits: Dynamic aspects including speaking rate, emotion, expressivity, volume, and other speaker style-related attributes. • Fusion: Complex audio captions that combine both intrinsic and situational descriptors. For each category, we randomly select 30 audio clips for human evaluation and scoring, and adopt a text-based large language model Qwen3-30B-A3B-Instruct-2507 10 (Yang et al., 2025a) to rewrite and manually filter the official captions provided, ensuring that the final captions only contain the intrinsic speaker or situational traits for evaluation. 

Human Annotation Protocol Figure 5 illus-trates the user interface used for human subjective evaluation. For each evaluation instance, 20 raters were presented with an audio clip together with three candidate captions describing the intrinsic speaker or situational traits. Raters were allowed to replay the audio as needed before providing their judgments. The correlation score was assessed us-ing a Mean Opinion Score (MOS) protocol. Raters assigned a score to each caption via a slider on a continuous scale from 0.0 to 5.0, where higher 

> 10 https://huggingface.co/Qwen/ Qwen3-30B-A3B-Instruct-2507

values indicate greater perceptual similarity and stronger consistency between the caption and the audio. Detailed scoring guidelines were displayed alongside the interface. Raters were instructed to evaluate each caption independently based on how accurately it captured style attributes of the speech, while ignoring irrelevant factors such as grammati-cal errors or minor wording variations. 

Evaluation Metrics We employ three widely rec-ognized statistical coefficients to measure the agree-ment between our model-derived similarity scores and human subjective ratings: • Pearson Correlation Coefficient ( r): Evaluates the linear relationship between the model predic-tions and human scores. • Spearman’s Rank Correlation ( ρ): Assesses the monotonic relationship, reflecting how well the model preserves the relative ranking of samples. • Kendall’s Tau ( τ ): Measures the ordinal associ-ation and pairwise agreement between the two sets of rankings, providing a robust check for consistency. 4230 F Visualization of Subjective Evaluation 

Figure 6 provides a visual comparison of the cor-relation between model-predicted similarity scores and human subjective ratings across four models and three paralinguistic trait categories. Compared to baseline models, the scatter plots for CLSP (bot-tom row) exhibit a significantly tighter clustering of data points around the red linear regression lines. This pattern is consistent across all sub-categories. The higher density of points along the diagonal con-firms that CLSP can reliably replicate the nuanced judgments of human experts. The visual trends observed in Figure 6, together with the strong Pearson, Spearman, and Kendall’s Tau correlations reported in Table 5, suggest that CLSP provides a reliable automated proxy for as-sessing speech-text style alignment. In particular, CLSP captures relative ranking and preference pat-terns that are consistent with human judgments, supporting its use for large-scale evaluation in speech-text matching scenarios where human an-notation is costly. 

G Ablation Studies 

We conduct ablation studies on the following com-ponents to provide an in-depth understanding of the training of CLSP: • Multi-stage training : We compare models trained with different stages (see Appendix G.1). • Target weight : We compare different target weights λ in multi-positive InfoNCE loss used in Stage Two (see Appendix G.2). • Task scheduler : We compare different task scheduling strategies used in Stage Two (see Ap-pendix G.3). 

G.1 Ablation Study: Multi-Stage Training 

Table 8 presents an ablation study examining the effectiveness of each training stage. Training with only Stage 1 primarily benefits fine-grained speech– text retrieval, whereas training with only Stage 2 achieves only limited performance on both global and fine-grained retrieval tasks. Combining both stages yields the best performance across all met-rics, demonstrating that each stage contributes ef-fectively to both global and fine-grained speech– text alignment. 

G.2 Ablation Study: Target Weight 

Table 9 reports an ablation study on the loss weight 

λ. Performance remains stable across a broad range of λ values, indicating that the proposed training objective is not overly sensitive to the exact choice of the target weight. Among the tested settings, 

λ = 0 .5 achieves the best overall performance on both global and fine-grained speech–text alignment, and is therefore used in all experiments. 

G.3 Ablation Study: Task Scheduler 

Table 10 presents an ablation study of different task scheduling strategies. For static mixtures, decreasing the sampling probability of Task 1 shifts the training focus to-wards fine-grained discrimination via semantic con-sistency, leading to consistent improvements in fine-grained retrieval performance but a notable degradation in global retrieval, particularly when p0

falls below 0.2. Conversely, assigning a higher sam-pling probability to Task 1 improves both global and fine-grained performance by encouraging effec-tive cross-granularity generalization, although fine-grained retrieval does not reach the level achieved when training exclusively with Task 2. These reveal a trade-off in static scheduling strategies. In contrast, dynamic schedulers effectively com-bine the advantages of both tasks and achieve overall stronger and more balanced performance across global and fine-grained retrieval. The best results are obtained by a dynamic scheduler that gradually shifts the sampling distribution from Task 1 to Task 2, with p0 = 0 .95 , pmin = 0 .50 ,and T = 10 ,000 , confirming the effectiveness of curriculum-style task scheduling. 4231 Intrinsic Traits Situational Traits Fusion LAION-AI CLAP GLAP ParaCLAP CLSP 

Figure 6: Correlation analysis between model-predicted similarity scores and subjective human ratings across different models and trait categories (Intrinsic, Situational, and Fusion). The green scatter plots demonstrate the alignment between automated metrics and human perception using the ParaSpeechCaps evaluation set. The dashed red lines represent the linear regression fit. 4232 Table 8: Ablation study of different training stages, evaluated on global speech–text retrieval and fine-grained speech–text retrieval tasks. ✓ / ✗ indicate whether a training stage is performed. 

Stage 1 Stage 2 Global Speech–Text Retrieval Fine-Grained Speech–Text Retrieval Avg. 

Speech-to-Text Text-to-Speech Speech-to-Text Text-to-Speech mAP@10 mAP@10 mAP@10 mAP@10 

✓ ✗ 11.1 9.6 69.6 64.0 38.6 

✗ ✓ 38.3 38.5 35.3 32.6 36.2 

✓ ✓ 58.7 54.5 77.9 77.2 67.1 

Table 9: Ablation study of different loss weights, evaluated on global speech–text retrieval and fine-grained speech– text retrieval tasks. 

λ

Global Speech–Text Retrieval Fine-Grained Speech–Text Retrieval Avg. 

Speech-to-Text Text-to-Speech Speech-to-Text Text-to-Speech mAP@10 mAP@10 mAP@10 mAP@10 0.3 53.4 52.6 77.9 77.0 65.2 0.4 56.0 55.1 77.5 75.5 66.0 0.5 58.7 54.5 77.9 77.2 67.1 

0.6 56.4 55.0 77.7 76.9 66.5 0.7 57.8 54.4 77.3 75.6 66.3 

Table 10: Ablation study of different task schedulers, evaluated on global speech–text retrieval and fine-grained speech–text retrieval tasks. 

p0 pmin T

Global Speech–Text Retrieval Fine-Grained Speech–Text Retrieval Avg. 

Speech-to-Text Text-to-Speech Speech-to-Text Text-to-Speech mAP@10 mAP@10 mAP@10 mAP@10 

Static Mixture 

0.00 – – 20.4 19.0 84.9 79.6 51.0 0.20 – – 42.7 41.1 83.9 78.9 61.7 0.30 – – 51.6 49.2 81.3 76.4 64.6 0.40 – – 51.1 50.6 79.2 77.1 64.5 0.50 – – 52.1 51.8 79.6 77.4 65.2 0.60 – – 54.4 52.5 79.7 76.7 65.8 0.70 – – 55.8 52.9 78.8 77.9 66.4 0.80 – – 56.9 54.5 77.7 76.0 66.3 0.90 – – 57.6 56.5 77.5 75.7 66.8 1.00 – – 57.6 55.9 77.9 74.9 66.6 

Dynamic Mixture 

0.95 0.05 5000 53.5 53.1 79.9 75.5 65.5 0.95 0.50 5000 55.7 54.4 78.0 76.9 66.3 0.95 0.50 10000 58.7 54.5 77.9 77.2 67.1 

0.95 0.50 15000 55.6 55.5 78.2 76.1 66.4 4233 Detailed  Captioner  User Prompt 

Your task is to generate a caption describing only the characteristics of the speaker's voice. 

Audio: {audio} 

CRITICAL RULES 

1. NEVER describe the content of the speech. Do not quote any words or phrases. NEVER contain quotation 

marks (""). 

2. FOCUS ONLY ON THE HUMAN VOICE . NEVER describe background, environment, audio quality. 

3. NEVER mention the absence of characteristics (describe only what is present, not mention what is not 

present). 

4. NEVER over -interpret or guess. 

5. Failure to follow these rules will result in an invalid output. 

Good Example 

A young male with a clear, medium -high pitched voice and an American accent speaks in a casual, conversational 

style, much like a reviewer or vlogger. He begins at a fast, rushed pace with a highly energetic and emphatic 

intonation, using a high pitch to express strong emphasis. After a slight inhale, he continues to speak quickly and 

enthusiastically, maintaining a moderately loud volume and an expressive, fluctuating tone throughout the fluent 

delivery. 

YOUR CAPTION: Figure 7: User prompt for detailed captioner. Detailed  Captioner  User Prompt w/ Tags 

Your task is to generate a caption describing only the characteristics of the speaker's voice. 

Audio: {audio} 

Use the following tags in the caption: 

- Accent : {accent} 

- Speaking Rate : { speaking_rate }

- Emotion / Expressiveness : { situational_tags }

CRITICAL RULES 

1. NEVER describe the content of the speech. Do not quote any words or phrases. NEVER contain quotation 

marks (""). 

2. FOCUS ONLY ON THE HUMAN VOICE . NEVER describe background, environment, audio quality. 

3. NEVER mention the absence of characteristics (describe only what is present, not mention what is not 

present). 

4. NEVER over -interpret or guess. 

5. Failure to follow these rules will result in an invalid output. 

Good Example 

A young male with a clear, medium -high pitched voice and an American accent speaks in a casual, conversational 

style, much like a reviewer or vlogger. He begins at a fast, rushed pace with a highly energetic and emphatic 

intonation, using a high pitch to express strong emphasis. After a slight inhale, he continues to speak quickly and 

enthusiastically, maintaining a moderately loud volume and an expressive, fluctuating tone throughout the fluent 

delivery. 

YOUR CAPTION: 

Figure 8: User prompt with human-annotated tags for detailed captioner. 4234 Caption  Quality  Assessment  API Prompt 

You are an evaluator assessing speech style caption quality. 

Audio: {audio} 

Caption A: {caption_a }

Caption B: {caption_b }

Task: 

Evaluate two captions based on the audio content; do not rely on external information. 

Assign scores from 1 to 5 for each caption on the three dimensions below, according to the scoring guidelines. 

Provide a brief explanation comparing the two captions. 

Scoring Guidelines: 

- Audio -grounded correctness: 

Does the caption accurately reflect what can be heard in the audio? 

Penalize factual errors, misattributions (e.g., confusing the speaker’s emotion with described content), or 

perceptual confusions (e.g., high volume vs. high pitch). 

5: Fully accurate and faithful to the audio; no factual or perceptual errors. 

4: Mostly accurate; minor imprecision that does not affect the main meaning. 

3: Partially correct; noticeable errors or ambiguities, but some correct aspects remain. 

2: Largely incorrect; multiple factual or perceptual errors that misrepresent the audio. 

1: Completely incorrect or misleading; does not reflect the audio at all. 

- Coverage: 

Does the caption adequately capture salient speaking -style attributes that are evident in the audio? 

Penalize missing important attributes, but do not penalize the absence of attributes that are not clearly audible. 

5: Captures all salient attributes evident in the audio. 

4: Captures most salient attributes; some minor attributes may be missing. 

3: Captures some attributes but misses some important ones. 

2: Captures very few attributes; most are missing. 

1: Fails to capture any speaking -style attributes. 

- Naturalness: 

Is the caption fluent, grammatical, and natural -sounding as a human -written description? 

Penalize awkward phrasing, grammatical errors, parenthetical explanations, or any patterns indicative of AI -

generated text. 

5: Fully fluent, grammatical, and natural -sounding; indistinguishable from a human -written caption. 

4: Generally fluent and natural with minor awkward phrasing or mild artificiality. 

3: Understandable but noticeably awkward or artificial in places. 

2: Poor fluency or clearly artificial, with stylistic or structural patterns typical of AI -generated text. 

1: Incoherent, ungrammatical, or strongly artificial and unnatural. 

Output Format: 

Respond in JSON format only. Do not output anything outside the JSON. 

{

"explanation": "<brief explaining>", 

"caption_a ": { 

"correctness": <integer from 1 to 5>, 

"coverage": <integer from 1 to 5>, 

"naturalness": <integer from 1 to 5> 

}, 

"caption_b ": { 

"correctness": <integer from 1 to 5>, 

"coverage": <integer from 1 to 5>, 

"naturalness": <integer from 1 to 5> 

}

}Figure 9: Detailed protocol of LLM-as-Judges. 4235