Title: 2026.findings-acl.2062.pdf

URL Source: https://aclanthology.org/2026.findings-acl.2062.pdf

Published Time: Thu, 11 Jun 2026 02:36:57 GMT

Number of Pages: 44

Markdown Content:
> Findings of the Association for Computational Linguistics: ACL 2026 , pages 41449–41492 July 2-7, 2026 ©2026 Association for Computational Linguistics

# Rolling Out Data Quality Overnight, without losing the plot: A Multi-Agent System for Speech Data Quality Management 

Rishabh Kumar 1, Abhinav Painuli 2*, Chriss Philip Saji 3*

Devesh Soni 1, Amrith Krishna 4, Ganesh Ramakrishnan 1

> 1

IIT Bombay, 2University of Delhi, 3UST and 4Oriflow  

> Correspondence: {krrishabh, ganesh}@cse.iitb.ac.in, ak2329@cantab.ac.uk

Abstract 

Quality management when creating large-scale speech datasets is essential for building reliable downstream models, yet verification pipelines are often brittle, domain-specific, and expertise-intensive. We introduce SpeechQM-Agent , a natural language-driven agentic framework that compiles user requirements into dependency-aware DAG workflows over modular tools for audio, transcript, and metadata verification. A central planner LLM enforces prerequisites and supports execution-time replanning (e.g., re-running failed steps or swapping tools), reduc-ing manual pipeline engineering and improv-ing robustness across heterogeneous vendor for-mats and multilingual settings. We also release 

SpeechQM-Dataset , a multilingual benchmark with controlled, vendor-inspired quality arti-facts spanning 24 verification tasks. Across ex-periments, SpeechQM-Agent attains 80-90% 

agreement with expert verification while requir-ing <20% of the cost and time of manual QC, and we further validate transfer to real vendor-supplied corpora. Planner LLM comparisons highlight fidelity-efficiency trade-offs. 

1 Introduction 

Data Quality Management (DQM) for speech is widely acknowledged to be resource-intensive and expensive, although it is critical to achieving reli-able downstream model performance (Seki et al., 2025; Gunduz et al., 2024). Although prior work shows that automating parts of DQM can sub-stantially improve throughput (Liu et al., 2021; Rousso et al., 2024), practical speech corpus cu-ration remains brittle due to inconsistently fol-lowed guidelines, limited annotation resources, and heterogeneous vendor pipelines (Ramirez et al., 2024). To address these challenges, we propose SPEECH QM-A GENT , a natural-language driven multi-agent framework for quality management in 

> *Work done during internship at IIT Bombay

speech-text aligned datasets. S PEECH QM-A GENT 

operationalizes 24 DQM tasks spanning determin-istic validation (e.g., format integrity, alignment consistency) and qualitative verification (e.g., tran-script plausibility, domain classification), achieving 80-90% of expert verification performance while requiring less than 20% of the cost and time of manual DQM. In speech datasets, even a seemingly simple verification request like “ensure these audio files play properly and are clear enough”, can lead to a complex workflow involving a series of tasks such as sample-rate and format validation, cor-ruption checks, and VAD-based silence analysis, among other steps, as shown in Figure 1. Con-figuring such pipelines and correctly specifying prerequisites across tools demands substantial do-main expertise, raising the barrier for non-experts and consuming time for experts that is often espe-cially scarce in low-resource and domain-specific settings (Adiga et al., 2021; Kumar et al., 2022b; Javed et al., 2024b; Team, 2025; Kumar et al., 2025). S PEECH QM-A GENT mitigates this by us-ing a natural-language interface to compile user requests into DAG-structured workflows over 24 reusable DQM tasks, organized into (i) determin-istic validations (e.g., corrupt-file detection, per-speaker duration, code-mixing statistics), (ii) qual-itative verifiers (e.g., domain classification, lan-guage identification, transcript coherence), and (iii) vendor-robust checks that surface systematic pipeline artifacts (e.g., upsampling detection, ex-cessive silence, content repetition). Importantly, S PEECH QM-A GENT framework covers both audio/metadata validation and tran-script/content verification (11 and 13 tasks, respec-tively), enabling end-to-end quality management across heterogeneous vendor pipelines (Rousso et al., 2024; Bredin et al., 2020). For non-experts, the natural-language interface abstracts away pipeline engineering by translating requests 

41449 3 41 2    

> Dependency
> 3412
> START
> 34
> 1
> 2END
> Tools

## +    

> Pre-defined
> B
> AD
> E
> F
> G
> Workflow Graph
> Task-Description Action List Node List
> KH
> Nested List Execution

Output  

> M
> J
> L
> I
> 1. Check sample rate (16/8 KHz) 2. Detect corruption 3. Generate transcripts 4. Infer domain from transcripts.
> Data Verification
> N
> C
> Can you check these audio files, make sure they play properly and are clear enough, and tell me what kind of content they are?: "xyz/test/ "

Figure 1: Architecture of the SpeechQM-Agent system. Given a natural language task description (A), a central planner LLM interprets the input (B) and generates an ordered action list (D), which is validated (C) and mapped to a node list (F). Dependencies among nodes are resolved into a nested structure (G) and used to generate a topologically sorted workflow graph (H). Each node is executed (K) using dynamically synthesized (L) or pre-defined tools (I). Execution is monitored for completeness, and outputs (M) are aggregated into a structured Data Verification Dashboard (N) for final review. 

into executable DAGs with explicit dependencies. For example, given the query “What kind of con-tent do these audio files contain?”, S PEECH QM-AGENT constructs a workflow that first generates transcripts and then performs domain inference (Transcription → Domain Classification ), ensur-ing prerequisite steps are satisfied automatically (Figure 1). SPEECH QM-A GENT is designed to augment rather than replace expert judgment: practitioners can select task-specific verification profiles, config-ure which checks are invoked, and adjust thresholds to match both the dataset and downstream use case (Variani et al., 2018; Madhani et al., 2023). For example, quality requirements differ substantially between text to speech (TTS) and automatic speech recognition (ASR) pipelines, TTS curation typi-cally prioritizes higher-fidelity audio and stricter noise/artefact filtering, whereas ASR datasets are often standardized to a target sampling rate and may tolerate broader acoustic variability depend-ing on the intended deployment setting. To sup-port non-experts, S PEECH QM-A GENT provides intent-conditioned defaults during workflow com-pilation, for example, mapping “build an ASR dataset” to a normalization target of 16kHz (or 8kHz for telephony-style data) and mapping “build a TTS dataset” to retaining 24/48kHz, while keep-ing all selected parameters explicit, auditable, and overridable by experts. Beyond selecting intent-conditioned defaults during workflow compilation, the central planner LLM also supports dynamic re-planning at execution time. When an intermediate step fails or yields low-confidence outputs (e.g., poor VAD segmentation), the planner can invoke an alternative tool or re-run the same tool with up-dated parameters, ensuring the workflow remains robust to tool-specific failure modes. The verification tasks in S PEECH QM-A GENT 

span both (i) deterministic checks, which are reli-ably measurable via automatic signals and rules (e.g., file/codec compliance, sampling-rate vali-dation, corruption detection, and upsampling ar-tifacts), and (ii) qualitative checks that require se-mantic or domain judgment (e.g., domain labeling, language identification under code-mixing, or tran-script plausibility). While deterministic failures can often be detected and remediated programmat-ically, qualitative judgments traditionally require expert review or crowd-sourced annotation, both of which are costly and potentially unreliable, es-pecially for low-resource Indic languages where 41450 domain experts are scarce and annotator familiarity varies widely (Kumar et al., 2026). S PEECH QM-AGENT therefore uses LLM-based verifiers on tran-scripts as a scalable proxy for such judgments, enabling domain- and content-level classification from limited seed descriptions or examples, and reducing dependence on expensive speech-specific supervision. We validate these qualitative checks against expert verification in our evaluation. A remaining challenge for speech DQM research is that many publicly released corpora are dis-tributed in comparatively curated form, while op-erational datasets frequently contain systematic pipeline and vendor artifacts which often are not publicly shared due to contractual and privacy con-siderations. As a result, common evaluation set-tings underrepresent real-world failure modes tar-geted by DQM workflows. To help close this re-alism gap, we release S PEECH QM-D ATASET , a benchmark with instances exhibiting artifact fami-lies covered by our 24 verification tasks (Table 1). For example, some datasets misrepresent their true sampling rate, using post-hoc upsampling that in-troduces detectable spectral signatures. By making such artifacts observable at scale, S PEECH QM-DATASET enables more realistic evaluation and development of speech data quality management systems 1

Our key contributions are as follows: 1. Natural-language, end-to-end speech DQM. 

We introduce S PEECH QM-A GENT , a dependency-aware multi-agent framework that compiles user intents into executable DAG workflows for speech-text dataset quality management, spanning assess-ment, validation, verification, and quality control across audio, metadata, and transcript/content sig-nals. 2. Practical efficiency with expert-level agree-ment. Across our evaluation, S PEECH QM-A GENT 

attains high agreement with expert verification (80-90%) while reducing manual cost/time to un-der 20% of a fully manual DQM workflow, en-abling scalable quality management in resource-constrained settings. 3. Dependency-aware orchestration with execution-time replanning. We propose a central planner that enforces prerequisites (e.g., transcrip-tion → domain inference), detects missing/low-confidence intermediate outputs, and triggers 

> 1Code and dataset: https://anonymous.4open.science/r/SpeechQM-Agent/

targeted re-runs or alternative tool invocations, improving workflow validity relative to non-dependency-aware baselines. 4. SpeechQM-Dataset: realistic QC artifacts for research. We release S PEECH QM-D ATASET , a benchmark containing 24 classes of dataset arti-facts reflecting common vendor/pipeline failures (e.g., corruption, upsampling, excessive silence, misalignment, repetition), together with evalua-tion protocols to support future research on speech DQM. 

2 SpeechQM-Agent 

In this section, we describe our proposed SpeechQM-Agent, a natural language-driven, LLM-coordinated multi-agent framework designed specifically for speech dataset quality verification. The framework takes as input a batch of speech data (waveforms, transcripts, metadata) and a natural-language verification request. It then (i) decom-poses the request into atomic checks, (ii) builds an executable DAG of those checks, (iii) instantiates or retrieves the required tools, and (iv) executes the graph while monitoring progress. Each stage in SpeechQM-Agent is powered by a specialized agent with its own planning, execution, or verifi-cation role, and these agents are coordinated by a central LLM planner (Wei et al., 2025). Figure 1 illustrates the pipeline, which consists of the fol-lowing stages: 

2.1 Task Parsing and Action Generation 

The SpeechQM-Agent: central planning agent (A-B) is the primary interface for user interaction. It receives tasks from the user, comprehends the tasks in natural language tasks description q, a central planning agent leverages an LLM to in-terpret and decompose it into a structured action list A = {ai}ni=1 , where each action ai denotes a specific atomic quality check. Each action corre-sponds to a specific atomic quality check, such as CheckSampleRate , DetectAudioCorruption ,or ValidateTranscript etc. The PlannerLLM is a constrained sequence-to-sequence model that maps natural language queries to validated action lists. 

A ← P lannerLLM θ(q)

This planning process uses a combination of lex-ical mapping (e.g., “VAD” → SilenceCheck ) and semantic prompting of an LLM to infer implied actions. Moreover, a lightweight rule-based LLM 41451 verifier ensures the consistency of A with known hard constraints. For instance, if q mentions silence or VAD, the agent appends asilence to A if missing by the central planning agent. 

2.2 Node Generation and Dependency Graph Construction 

We define an agentic workflow as a series of LLM invokes in which the action list is fur-ther transformed into executable nodes V =

{v1, v 2, . . . , v n}. Each node vi represents a spe-cific discrete verification subtask performed by an LLM. The dependencies between nodes are explic-itly captured to construct a Directed Acyclic Graph (DAG) that is a pair G = ( V, E ), where: - V is a finite set of vertices, - E ⊆ V × V is a set of directed edges, such that there does not exist any sequence of distinct vertices v1, v 2, . . . , v k ∈ V with 

k ≥ 2 satisfying (v1, v 2) ∈ E, (v2, v 3) ∈

E, . . . , (vk−1, v k) ∈ E, and (vk, v 1) ∈ E where edges E represent dependencies between subtasks, which also govern the execution sequence. Although graph structures can represent work-flow relationships W , they require complex ex-tensions beyond basic DAGs to naturally express parallel execution and conditional logic (Hu et al., 2024a). Neural networks enable adaptive transi-tions but lack precise control over workflow execu-tion (Liu et al., 2023). In contrast, code representa-tion inherently supports all the above relationships through standard programming constructs. There-fore, we adopt the code (Zhuge et al., 2024) as our primary edge structure to maximize expressiv-ity. Then, the nodes are first linearly sequenced using topological sorting, where a linear ordering of the vertices is established such that each vertex appears before all vertices to which it has outgoing edges, followed by the establishment of parallel or sequential execution relationships: 

C(V ) ⇒ T opologicalSort ⇒ G

2.3 Tool Synthesis and Retrieval 

Each verification node vi is associated with an exe-cutable tool Ti. Tools are selected or synthesized via: 1) Dynamic LLM-based tool synthesis Tgen :The agent prompts an LLM to generate the tools and callable functions. The tools are generated on demand for new or customized tasks. and 2) Predefined tool repository Tlib : A curated set of robust tools pre-generated using GPT-4o for stable performance when synthesis fails or confidence is low. The overall tool set is represented as: 

T = Tgen ∪ Tlib 

The tool selection may be revised if the tool fails validation checks or runtime execution. 

2.4 Workflow Execution and Monitoring 

We execute the workflow graph G following the topological order with dependency-aware paral-lelism. A monitoring agent uses a separate LLM to track the execution status of each node, ensuring completeness and robustness. Let yi be the output of node vi. If yi = ∅ or an exception is detected, the execution checker retries Ti up to r times. This guarantees completeness: 

∀vi ∈ V, ∃ˆyi̸ = ∅ ∨ fail (vi)

Nodes that fail to execute are automatically retried or escalated for manual inspection 2.

2.5 Output Aggregation and Dashboard Generation 

Upon completion, outputs from all executed nodes are aggregated into structured reports and visual dashboards. These dashboards enable users to in-teractively inspect and review quality metrics, error distributions, and execution logs for transparency and auditability. This enables both human ana-lysts and downstream systems to filter or prioritize batches for the data verification task. 

2.6 Modularity and Extensibility 

SpeechQM-Agent is modular by design, with each stage (action parsing, node building, tool gen-eration, execution) being LLM-agent pluggable. New tasks can be added by either extending the action ontology or defining a new node schema, supplying new tool definitions, or enabling auto-synthesis. This architecture generalizes across ven-dor schemas, speech domains, and languages with-out manual scripting, making it especially suited for multi-source, low-resource datasets. It also en-sures adaptability and scalability to diverse speech dataset curation challenges. 

3 Data Creation Pipeline 

We develop SpeechQM-Dataset, a synthetic speech-text benchmark designed to capture realistic quality 

> 2See Appendix J for all the prompts.

41452 Prompt-Driven Dialogue Planner  

> Metadata & Prob. Perturbation ( 𝛂 )
> Post-Validation & Structured Export
> Speaker Attr. & TTS Synthesis
> Indic/low-resource languages
> 4
> A
> 351
> LLM-as-a-Judge
> Cross-Lingual Translation
> 2
> A
> LLM-as-a-Judge
> A
> LLM-as-a-Judge
> Tags, swaps, rare vocab, noise injection
> Speaker conditioned voices: accent, gender etc
> Syn. Data
> Corrupted
> Syn. Data
> Clean
> .json/.xml + audio (clean & corrupted)

Figure 2: The five-stage data creation pipeline used for SpeechQM-Dataset: (1) prompt-driven dialogue planning, (2) cross-lingual translation, (3) metadata extraction and probabilistic perturbation, (4) speaker attribution & TTS synthesis, and (5) post-validation with structured export. LLM-as-a-Judge checkpoints (dashed) provide filtering and consistency checks at key stages. 

control (QC) challenges. Unlike prior synthetic pipelines that primarily generate clean training data, the SpeechQM-Dataset is explicitly QC-aware: it integrates controlled noise, multilingual translation, and LLM-as-a-Judge validation to simulate diverse error conditions. This makes it the first dataset design to evaluate verification agents. The general workflow for creating synthetic data is illustrated in Figure 2. The pipeline proceeds in five stages: 1. Prompt-Driven Dialogue Generation : A carefully crafted natural language prompt encodes the intention of the task, speaker roles, and do-main constraints. An LLM-based dialogue planner (Deng et al., 2023; Yi et al., 2024) expands this into multi-turn conversations, guided by long-form ex-amples for discourse coherence. A controller agent may invoke LLM-as-a-Judge (Gu et al., 2024b) to enforce factuality and conversational realism. 2. Cross-Lingual Translation : The gener-ated dialogues are translated into low-resource lan-guages using multilingual LLMs (Joshi et al., 2024) or specialized translation modules, enabling cover-age across Indic and other under-resourced settings. 3. Metadata Extraction and Perturbation :Conversations are automatically annotated with speaker turns, utterance boundaries, and intent labels. A probabilistic perturbation module in-troduces structured noise, such as tag insertions (<noise> , <html> ), token swaps, or injection of rare vocabulary, under a tunable threshold parame-ter α. This simulates systematic QC-relevant errors that are absent in previous corpora. 4. Speaker Attribution and TTS Synthesis :Synthetic speaker IDs condition TTS models to produce speech audio with varied voices, accents, prosody, and gender. This ensures demographic and acoustic diversity while maintaining alignment with transcripts. 5. Post-Validation and Structured Export :Both transcripts and audio undergo selective cor-ruption (e.g., clipping, token drops) to mimic real-world ASR artifacts. The final outputs, text, meta-data, and audio, are exported in standardized .json 

or .xml formats. In multiple stages, LLM-as-a-Judge (Gu et al., 2024a) is invoked to detect hallu-cinations or inconsistencies, filtering low-quality samples. The resulting dataset provides fine-grained control over linguistic, acoustic, and structural properties, yielding a benchmark that is both scalable and real-istic for evaluating multi-agent QC systems. 3

3.1 Data Quality Verification 

To systematically evaluate dataset quality, we de-sign the SpeechQM-Dataset to include controlled errors injected through rule-based perturbations and LLM-as-a-Judge validation (Gu et al., 2024a). This allows us to benchmark verification methods against realistic error distributions. The verification process is implemented as a two-stage suite that mirrors the multi-agent architecture of SpeechQM-Agent: (i) QC1 for audio and meta-data validation, and (ii) QC2 for transcript and con-tent validation. This modular separation enables parallelization while covering complementary error types. For further details, see Appendix E. 

Checklist Overview : Table 1 summarizes all the QC1 and QC2 checks. Together, they capture a broad spectrum of quality dimensions, from file integrity and speaker uniqueness to transcription reliability, script consistency, and domain balance. Unlike prior ad hoc QC efforts, this structured de-sign provides the first unified, evaluation-aware benchmark for speech dataset verification. 

> 3For further details, please refer to Appendix D.

41453 QC Level Check Name Description                                             

> QC1 Language Identification (Audio) Uses multilingual models to detect the spoken language, independent of metadata. QC1 File Format Validates that the audio file conforms to required encoding standards (e.g., WAV). QC1 Corrupt File Detection Detects corrupted or zero-length audio files. QC1 Sample Rate Check Verifies if the sample rate is 16 kHz and above. QC1 Silence Duration Calculates the total silence duration per audio file. QC1 Upsampling Detection Identifies audio upsampled from low fidelity (e.g., 8 kHz to 16 kHz). QC1 Number of Speakers Estimates the number of unique speakers in the batch. QC1 Per-Speaker Duration Measures cumulative speaking time per speaker to ensure speaker diversity. QC1 Speaker Validity Checks if a speaker is repeated across batches (e.g., same vendor, same voice reused). QC2 Audio-Transcript Alignment Aligns transcript with audio, regardless of format or file structure. QC2 Timestamp-Based Segmentation Segments long audio using provided transcription time-stamps for utterance-level alignment. QC2 Script Consistency Ensures transcript uses the correct native script, avoiding Romanized text unless intentional. QC2 Code-Mixing Detection Identifies code-mixed utterances (e.g., English-Hindi), which may require a diverse dataset. QC2 MOE Score (Mixture of Experts) Calculates WER and CER using multiple ASR models to quantify transcription quality. QC2 CTC Score Computes the Connectionist Temporal Classification (CTC) loss using the wav2vec model. QC2 LLM Score Evaluates transcript coherence and fluency using LLM-as-a-Judge. QC2 Transcript Normalization Removes HTML tags, other tags, or other extraneous tokens from the transcript. QC2 Transliteration Consistency Checks Roman-to-native script transliteration for consistent representation. QC2 Grapheme Analyze the distribution of different characters. QC2 Vocabulary Coverage Analyzes the distribution of rare words. QC2 Domain Classification Assigns each sample to domain labels (e.g., agriculture, etc) to ensure topic diversity. QC2 Content Repetition Check Flags duplicated or reused content within or across datasets, including public corpora overlaps.

Table 1: Overview of Data Quality Control (QC) Modules used by the SpeechQM-Agent for analyzing SpeechQM-Dataset and other speech datasets. 

4 Experiments 

4.1 Dataset Construction 

To rigorously evaluate SpeechQM-Agent, we intro-duce the SpeechQM-Dataset , a synthetic yet QC-aware benchmark specifically designed for multi-lingual low-resource settings, with a focus on Indic languages, starting with Hindi language. Unlike prior synthetic corpora that emphasize clean train-ing data, the SpeechQM-Dataset explicitly incor-porates controlled variability and error patterns to stress-test verification systems. The dataset is generated through a multi-step LLM+TTS pipeline (Section 3). Three strong LLMs: LLaMA-3.3-70B , GPT-4o/4o-mini , and 

DeepSeek-R1-distill , produce English multi-turn dialogues across 11 domains and 55 scenarios, en-suring conversational and stylistic diversity. The dialogues are translated into Hindi (Devanagari script) using multilingual LLMs, normalized, and converted into audio with a speaker-conditioned TTS model, yielding natural variation in voice, ac-cent, and prosody. Each sample is annotated with metadata fields in-cluding verbatim text, audio duration, scenario, do-main, speaker ID, native language, gender, and age group. Speaker IDs and demographics are adapted from the LAHAJA dataset (Javed et al., 2024a), ensuring realistic population balance. Importantly, original Lahaja transcripts/audio are replaced with synthetic content, preserving demographics while avoiding data leakage. For further details, see Ap-pendix C. 

4.2 Quality Verification Framework 

We benchmark SpeechQM-Agent on a two-stage verification suite aligned with its modular archi-tecture: QC1: Audio & Metadata Verification -Includes language ID, file format integrity, sample rate, silence/noise, upsampling artifacts, speaker reuse detection, and speaker-hour balance. QC2: Transcript & Content Verification - Includes forced alignment, CTC loss (wav2vec2.0), ensem-ble WER/CER scoring, LLM-as-a-Judge fluency scoring, domain classification, transliteration con-sistency, grapheme distribution, vocabulary rarity and duplication detection (Kumar et al., 2024). Table 1 enumerates all 24 checked implementa-tions. To control difficulty, the dataset is partitioned into subfolders: QC1/2-1 (single transformation), QC1/2-2 (randomly paired transformations), and QC1/2-3 (three or more transformations). This de-sign allows for controlled evaluation verification under increasing error complexity. 

4.3 Baselines and LLM Variants 

We evaluated SpeechQM-Agent with five plan-ner LLMs: GPT-4o , GPT-4.1 , DeepSeek-R1-distill ,

LLaMA-3.3-70B , and LLaMA-3.1-8B .1. Execution Accuracy : proportion of verifica-tion actions producing correct results given ground-41454 truth annotations. 2. Hallucination Rate : fraction of actions not present in the requested query but introduced by the planner. 3. Runtime : average end-to-end wall-clock time per verification batch. 4. Cost Efficiency : normalized token cost per 1K tokens (see Appendix B.1). We compare against one non-agentic and two agentic baselines: (i) a Human Annotation base-line , simulated through 5 annotators performing random 10% sampling (Kumar et al., 2022a). These establish lower/upper bounds for scalabil-ity and quality. (ii) a Single-Agent parses the user query, creates an action plan, and directly executes all verification tasks sequentially without explicit decomposition or dependency modeling, and (iii) a 

Multi-Agent handle subtasks in parallel, but with-out a central LLM planner or dependency graph, leading to limited coordination and potential order-ing errors across tasks. Our evaluation addresses three questions: (1) Can the SpeechQM-Agent generalize verifica-tion workflows across languages and vendor for-mats? (2) Which planner LLM offers the best trade-off between accuracy, hallucination, and cost? (3) How does agentic verification compare against static pipelines and human-in-the-loop sampling?                          

> Model File Corrupt Sample Domain Format Rate
> gpt-4o-mini 100 100 100 28.17
> gpt-4.1-mini 100 100 100 60.32
> deepseek-r1 0100 081.30
> llama-3.1-8b 0100 021.48
> llama-3.3-70b 100 100 100 75.40

Table 2: QC1 evaluation across four subtasks. 

5 Results and Discussion 

Tables 2 and 3 show that SpeechQM-Agent consis-tently performs verification tasks across heteroge-neous data sources. In QC1 (audio and metadata),                             

> LLM Roman Mean # HTML # EN Variant Script WER Tags Tokens
> gpt-4.1-mini 99.64 0.094 99.96 100
> gpt-4o-mini 66.40 1.151 98.33 68.17
> deepseek-r1 85.2 0.334 00
> llama-3.1-8b 00091.34
> llama-3.3-70b 99.46 0.120 100 78.70

Table 3: QC2 evaluation across four subtasks.             

> Model Accuracy (%) Time (sec)
> gpt-4o-mini 75 354.207
> gpt-4.1-mini 75 136.545
> llama-3.3-70b 62.5 64.056
> llama-3.1-8b 25 80.326
> deepseek-r1 25 72.693

Table 4: LLM performance on QC1 instructions.             

> Model Accuracy (%) Time (sec)
> gpt-4o-mini 100 347.397
> gpt-4.1-mini 100 298.261
> deepseek-r1 12.5 65.314
> llama-3.1-8b 33 60.542
> llama-3.3-70b 72 37.380

Table 5: Evaluation of LLMs on QC2 instructions. 

all strong planner LLMs achieve near-perfect detec-tion of file-format errors, corruption, and sample rate anomalies, confirming robustness to vendor-side audio inconsistencies. In QC2 (transcripts and content), clearer differences emerge: GPT-4.1-mini and LLaMA-3.3-70B both surpass 99% accuracy in Roman script and HTML tag detec-tion with low WER scores, while smaller mod-els degrade substantially. Importantly, SpeechQM-Agent transfers effectively from Hindi Devanagari-script benchmarks to additional Indic languages in our extended in-house corpus, suggesting that its workflow abstraction generalizes beyond the synthetic dataset. Together, these results validate our claim that SpeechQM-Agent can handle both cross-lingual variability and vendor-specific data formats. Tables 4 and 5 compare planner LLMs on execu-tion accuracy, hallucination rate, and runtime. GPT-4.1-mini achieves the strongest transcript-level fi-delity (99.64% in Roman script, 0.094 mean WER) with zero hallucinated steps, albeit at a moderate runtime cost (136-298s per batch). LLaMA-3.3-70B offers the best trade-off between efficiency and accuracy, completing QC pipelines in under 40s with only minor accuracy degradation. By con-trast, smaller models such as GPT-4o-mini strug-gle with high hallucination rates, while DeepSeek-R1, although less reliable for QC pipelines, proves highly effective for reasoning-oriented tasks such as domain classification. Overall, the results re-veal a flexible deployment spectrum: high-stakes verification may prioritize GPT-4.1-mini for max-imal fidelity, LLaMA-3.3-70B enables cost-and time-efficient batch verification, and DeepSeek-R1 supports logical checks like domain identification. We validate this framework through downstream 41455 Training Data Source WER (%) Curation Method       

> Random Bhashini subset 12.9 None (baseline) SpeechQM-Agent curated 9.8 Fully automated Shrutilipi (matched hrs) ∼9.8 Semi-auto + HITL

Table 6: Downstream ASR performance comparison. SpeechQM-Agent curation achieves 3.1 WER absolute improvement over random sampling and matches semi-automated human-in-the-loop (HITL) quality. 

ASR experiments (Section 5.1) and large-scale real-world deployment across eight Indic languages (Section 5.2). 

5.1 Downstream Impact 

To validate that SpeechQM-Agent curation im-proves downstream model quality beyond cost re-duction, we trained ASR models on different data subsets under controlled conditions. Using identi-cal training configurations and matched hours, we compared three approaches: (i) a random subset from the Bhashini corpus (Sunitha and Teja), (ii) a SpeechQM-Agent curated subset from the same source, and (iii) the Shrutilipi dataset (Bhogale et al., 2023), a semi-automated corpus with human-in-the-loop filtering. Table 6 shows that the random Bhashini subset yielded 12.9 WER, while the SpeechQM-Agent curated subset achieved 9.8 WER, an absolute im-provement of 3.1 WER. This demonstrates that automated curation significantly outperforms no curation or random sampling. Moreover, the SpeechQM-Agent curated model performed com-parably to one trained on Shrutilipi (at matched hours and configuration), indicating that fully au-tomated curation can approach the quality human-assisted pipeline. We further analyzed the impact of imperfect cu-ration (the residual 10-20% disagreement with ex-pert verification). Controlled experiments showed that up to 30% out-of-domain content had minimal effect on WER, while exceeding 50% led to signif-icant degradation. The primary source of curation errors was domain misclassification, which falls within the tolerable range and does not harm down-stream ASR performance. These results confirm that SpeechQM-Agent curation delivers measur-able quality improvements for production models. 

5.2 Real-World Vendor Datasets 

We deployed SpeechQM-Agent on a 12,000-hour multi-vendor speech corpus spanning Hindi,                       

> Error Category Hours/Files Languages
> Low sample rate 800 hrs Hindi Roman-script transcripts 300 hrs Assamese, Marathi Silence-only audio 200 hrs Multi-vendor Proxy/synthetic speakers 200 hrs Multi-vendor Misaligned pairs 100 hrs Multi-vendor Duplicated content 500 hrs Cross-vendor Corrupted files 987 files Multiple
> Total flagged 1,950 hrs (32.5%) 8 Indic langs Validated clean 4,050 hrs (67.5%) –
> Total audited 6,000 hrs –

Table 7: Real-world vendor audit summary. SpeechQM-Agent flagged diverse quality issues across 12,000-hour multi-vendor corpus, with a detailed breakdown for 6,000 hours currently validated. 

Assamese, Marathi, and five other Indic lan-guages. Table 7 summarizes the errors automat-ically flagged by the system. The system identified 800 hours of Hindi audio with substandard sam-pling rates, 300 hours of Roman-script transcripts across Assamese and Marathi, 200 hours of silence-only audio, 200 hours of proxy (synthetic) speakers, 100 hours of misaligned audio-transcript pairs, 500 hours of duplicated content across vendors, and 987 corrupted audio files. The hours flagged under each error type were requested again from vendors as replacement datasets. Crucially, SpeechQM-Agent not only surfaced errors but also highlighted vendors consistently de-livering high-quality corpora, enabling more in-formed procurement decisions and vendor account-ability. Across 6,000 hours currently validated, the system flagged 1,950 hours (32.5%) as problem-atic and validated 4,050 hours (67.5%) as reliable. These results illustrate that SpeechQM-Agent can perform systematic, large-scale dataset audits, of-fering both coverage and cost-efficiency beyond static pipelines or manual sampling. 

5.3 Agentic vs. Static and Human-in-the-Loop Pipelines 

Figure 3 contrasts SpeechQM-Agent with static pipelines and human verification. Static baselines (single-agent execution) achieve low accuracy ( ≤

0.4) despite fast runtime, underscoring their inabil-ity to capture interdependent checks. In contrast, the full SpeechQM-Agent (with centralized LLM planning) attains accuracies above 0.8, approaching human-level reliability, while maintaining runtimes an order of magnitude lower than those of manual verification. The Human Verifier in this study is a speech technology expert, highly skilled in ap-41456 Single Agent 

> Execution
> Multi-Agent w/o
> Central LLM
> Full System
> (Llama 70B)
> Full System
> (ChatGPT-4o)
> Human
> In Loop
> System
> 0.0
> 0.2
> 0.4
> 0.6
> 0.8
> 1.0
> Accuracy (Proportion)
> 0
> 500
> 1000
> 1500
> 2000
> 2500
> Time (seconds)

Figure 3: Comparison of verification accuracy (blue bars) and runtime (red line) across diff. system configu-rations. 

plying multiple techniques to assess the quality of speech datasets, and thus represents the gold stan-dard ( ∼1.0 accuracy). However, such expert verifi-cation is prohibitively expensive (more than 2500s per batch). SpeechQM-Agent therefore bridges the gap, providing 80-90% of expert-level verification accuracy at less than 20% of the time cost. Taken together, these findings validate SpeechQM-Agent as the first scalable end-to-end framework for the verification of the quality of the speech dataset in low-resource multilingual settings 4. We include a detailed case study in Appendix F to demonstrate the generalizability of SpeechQM-Agent to real-world scenarios. 

6 Related Work 

Recent advances in LLMs have enabled agen-tic systems for tool-driven reasoning and auto-mated task orchestration, including multi-agent collaboration and workflow-centric planning (Liu et al., 2023, 2024; Zhong et al., 2024; Zhu et al., 2024; Sun et al., 2024; Xie et al., 2024). Mac-Net (Qian et al., 2024) and EvoMAC (Hu et al., 2024c) study how to scale collaboration and co-ordination, while AFlow (Zhang et al., 2024b) and WorfBench/WorfEval (Qiao et al., 2024) for-malize workflows as DAGs and evaluate planning quality via structural metrics. These works are largely domain-agnostic: they do not target speech dataset verification as a first-class objective, nor do they ground workflows in speech-specific qual-ity checks or evaluate against expert verification in low-resource multilingual settings. A separate line of work studies modular agent design and tool usage, e.g., pruning redundant interactions (AgentPrune; Zhang et al., 2024a), 

> 4

For future directions, see Appendix I. 

improving multimodal tool use (T3-Agent; Gao et al., 2024a,b), and simplifying agent construction (AutoAgent, AgentSquare, and automated design frameworks; Tang et al., 2025; Shang et al., 2024; Hu et al., 2024b). In contrast, S PEECH QM-A GENT 

is centered on robust, reusable speech DQM tools (e.g., VAD, IndicLID, CTC-based valida-tors, forced-alignment checks) and on dependency-aware orchestration that composes these tools into executable workflows over heterogeneous formats and multilingual scripts. Finally, DQM for speech is widely recognized as expensive yet essential for downstream model performance (Seki et al., 2025; Gunduz et al., 2024), and partial automation can improve ef-ficiency while remaining competitive with man-ual verification (Liu et al., 2021; Rousso et al., 2024). Existing speech data inspection toolkits typi-cally provide fixed-function checks and dashboards. SPEECH QM-A GENT differs by compiling natural-language intents into DAG-structured verification workflows over a broader suite of audio/metadata and transcript/content checks (Table 1), and by evaluating workflows using both planning-oriented graph measures and speech-specific quality indica-tors (e.g., WER/CER and alignment accuracy). 

7 Conclusion 

We introduced SpeechQM-Agent , a natural language-driven multi-agent framework for scal-able speech dataset quality management. By us-ing a central planner to compile user intents into 

dependency-aware DAG workflows over modular verification tools, SpeechQM-Agent reduces man-ual pipeline engineering while supporting robust execution via prerequisite enforcement and targeted replanning when intermediate steps fail. Across our evaluation, SpeechQM-Agent achieves 80-90% 

agreement with expert verification at <20% of the cost and time of fully manual QC. We further re-lease SpeechQM-Dataset , a multilingual bench-mark of vendor-inspired, controlled quality arti-facts spanning 24 verification tasks, enabling sys-tematic evaluation of verification systems. Finally, our planner-LLM analysis highlights clear fidelity-efficiency trade-offs, providing practical guidance for deploying SpeechQM-Agent under different resource constraints. 41457 Limitations 

Although SpeechQM-Agent represents a first step toward scalable quality verification of multilingual speech datasets, it has several limitations. First, the performance of the system strongly depends on PlannerLLM . Smaller models (e.g., LLaMA-3.1-8B) underperform due to limited exposure to Indic languages, and even stronger models (e.g., GPT-4.1-mini) sometimes hallucinate additional steps, creating reliability challenges. Second, the current evaluation focuses on the verification of 

audio-transcript ; extensions to multimodal data (e.g. speech-translation or dialogue corpora) re-main unexplored. Third, the system cannot yet de-tect dialect/accent imbalance or socio-linguistic biases in large corpora. Finally, runtime remains non-trivial for large corpora, and while significantly faster than human annotation, scaling to hundreds of thousands of hours will require additional opti-mization and distributed execution strategies. Despite these limitations, SpeechQM-Agent es-tablishes a foundation for future research in dy-namic, LLM-driven quality control of speech and multimodal datasets. 

References 

Devaraja Adiga, Rishabh Kumar, Amrith Krishna, Preethi Jyothi, Ganesh Ramakrishnan, and Pawan Goyal. 2021. Automatic speech recognition in san-skrit: A new speech corpus and modelling insights. 

arXiv preprint arXiv:2106.05852 .Kaushal Bhogale, Abhigyan Raman, Tahir Javed, Sumanth Doddapaneni, Anoop Kunchukuttan, Pratyush Kumar, and Mitesh M Khapra. 2023. Effec-tiveness of mining audio and text pairs from public data for improving asr systems for low-resource lan-guages. In Icassp 2023-2023 ieee international con-ference on acoustics, speech and signal processing (icassp) , pages 1–5. IEEE. Hervé Bredin, Ruiqing Yin, Juan Manuel Coria, Gre-gory Gelly, Pavel Korshunov, Marvin Lavechin, Diego Fustes, Hadrien Titeux, Wassim Bouaziz, and Marie-Philippe Gill. 2020. Pyannote. audio: neural building blocks for speaker diarization. In ICASSP 2020-2020 IEEE International Conference on Acous-tics, Speech and Signal Processing (ICASSP) , pages 7124–7128. IEEE. Yang Deng, Wenxuan Zhang, Wai Lam, See-Kiong Ng, and Tat-Seng Chua. 2023. Plug-and-play policy planner for large language model powered dialogue agents. arXiv preprint arXiv:2311.00262 .Zhi Gao, Bofei Zhang, Pengxiang Li, Xiaojian Ma, Tao Yuan, Yue Fan, Yuwei Wu, Yunde Jia, Song-Chun Zhu, and Qing Li. 2024a. Multi-modal agent tuning: Building a vlm-driven agent for efficient tool usage. 

arXiv preprint arXiv:2412.15606 .Zhi Gao, Bofei Zhang, Pengxiang Li, Xiaojian Ma, Tao Yuan, Yue Fan, Yuwei Wu, Yunde Jia, Song-Chun Zhu, and Qing Li. 2024b. Multi-modal agent tuning: Building a vlm-driven agent for efficient tool usage. 

ArXiv , abs/2412.15606. Jiawei Gu, Xuhui Jiang, Zhichao Shi, Hexiang Tan, Xuehao Zhai, Chengjin Xu, Wei Li, Yinghan Shen, Shengjie Ma, Honghao Liu, Yuanzhuo Wang, and Jian Guo. 2024a. A survey on llm-as-a-judge. ArXiv ,abs/2411.15594. Jiawei Gu, Xuhui Jiang, Zhichao Shi, Hexiang Tan, Xuehao Zhai, Chengjin Xu, Wei Li, Yinghan Shen, Shengjie Ma, Honghao Liu, et al. 2024b. A survey on llm-as-a-judge. arXiv preprint arXiv:2411.15594 .Ahmet Gunduz, Kamer Ali Yuksel, Kareem Darwish, Golara Javadi, Fabio Minazzi, Nicola Sobieski, and Sébastien Bratières. 2024. An automated end-to-end open-source software for high-quality text-to-speech dataset generation. In Proceedings of the 2024 Joint International Conference on Computational Linguis-tics, Language Resources and Evaluation (LREC-COLING 2024) , pages 1043–1051, Torino, Italia. ELRA and ICCL. Shengran Hu, Cong Lu, and Jeff Clune. 2024a. Automated design of agentic systems. ArXiv ,abs/2408.08435. Shengran Hu, Cong Lu, and Jeff Clune. 2024b. Au-tomated design of agentic systems. arXiv preprint arXiv:2408.08435 .Yue Hu, Yuzhu Cai, Yaxin Du, Xinyu Zhu, Xiangrui Liu, Zijie Yu, Yuchen Hou, Shuo Tang, and Siheng Chen. 2024c. Self-evolving multi-agent collaboration net-works for software development. arXiv preprint arXiv:2410.16946 .Tahir Javed, Janki Nawale, Sakshi Joshi, Eldho George, Kaushal Bhogale, Deovrat Mehendale, and Mitesh M. Khapra. 2024a. LAHAJA: A Robust Multi-accent Benchmark for Evaluating Hindi ASR Systems. In 

Interspeech 2024 , pages 2320–2324. Tahir Javed, Janki Atul Nawale, Eldho Ittan George, Sakshi Joshi, Kaushal Santosh Bhogale, Deovrat Mehendale, Ishvinder Virender Sethi, Aparna Anan-thanarayanan, Hafsah Faquih, Pratiti Palit, et al. 2024b. Indicvoices: Towards building an inclu-sive multilingual speech dataset for indian languages. 

arXiv preprint arXiv:2403.01926 .Raviraj Joshi, Kanishk Singla, Anusha Kamath, Rau-nak Kalani, Rakesh Paul, Utkarsh Vaidya, San-jay Singh Chauhan, Niranjan Wartikar, and Eileen Long. 2024. Adapting multilingual llms to low-resource languages using continued pre-training and synthetic corpus. arXiv preprint arXiv:2410.14815 .41458 Rishabh Kumar, Devaraja Adiga, Mayank Kothyari, Jatin Dalal, Ganesh Ramakrishnan, and Preethi Jyothi. 2022a. Vagyojaka: An annotating and post-editing tool for automatic speech recognition. In 

INTERSPEECH , pages 857–858. Rishabh Kumar, Devaraja Adiga, Rishav Ranjan, Am-rith Krishna, Ganesh Ramakrishnan, Pawan Goyal, and Preethi Jyothi. 2022b. Linguistically informed post-processing for asr error correction in sanskrit. In INTERSPEECH , pages 2293–2297. Rishabh Kumar, Devaraja Adiga, Rishav Ranjan, Am-rith Krishna, Ganesh Ramakrishnan, Pawan Goyal, and Preethi Jyothi. 2025. Linguistically informed automatic speech recognition in sanskrit. Computer Speech & Language , page 101861. Rishabh Kumar, Sabyasachi Ghosh, and Ganesh Ra-makrishnan. 2024. Beyond common words: Enhanc-ing asr cross-lingual proper noun recognition using large language models. In Findings of the Associa-tion for Computational Linguistics: EMNLP 2024 ,pages 6821–6828. Rishabh Kumar, Amrith Krishna, Ganesh Ramakrish-nan, and Preethi Jyothi. 2026. Post-asr correction in hindi: Comparing language models and large lan-guage models in low-resource scenarios. In Proceed-ings of the 19th Conference of the European Chapter of the Association for Computational Linguistics (Vol-ume 2: Short Papers) , pages 636–645. Mingkuan Liu, Chi Zhang, Hua Xing, Chao Feng, Monchu Chen, Judith Bishop, and Grace Ngapo. 2021. Scalable data annotation pipeline for high-quality large speech datasets development. arXiv preprint arXiv:2109.01164 .Xinyu Liu, Shuyu Shen, Boyan Li, Peixian Ma, Runzhi Jiang, Yuxin Zhang, Ju Fan, Guoliang Li, Nan Tang, and Yuyu Luo. 2024. A survey of nl2sql with large language models: Where are we, and where are we going? arXiv preprint arXiv:2408.05109 .Zijun Liu, Yanzhe Zhang, Peng Li, Yang Liu, and Diyi Yang. 2023. A dynamic llm-powered agent network for task-oriented agent collaboration. Yash Madhani, Mitesh M. Khapra, and Anoop Kunchukuttan. 2023. Bhasa-abhijnaanam: Native-script and romanized language identification for 22 indic languages. In Annual Meeting of the Associa-tion for Computational Linguistics .Chen Qian, Zihao Xie, Yifei Wang, Wei Liu, Yu-fan Dang, Zhuoyun Du, Weize Chen, Cheng Yang, Zhiyuan Liu, and Maosong Sun. 2024. Scaling large-language-model-based multi-agent collabora-tion. arXiv preprint arXiv:2406.07155 .Shuofei Qiao, Runnan Fang, Zhisong Qiu, Xiaobin Wang, Ningyu Zhang, Yong Jiang, Pengjun Xie, Fei Huang, and Huajun Chen. 2024. Benchmark-ing agentic workflow generation. arXiv preprint arXiv:2410.07869 .Francis McCann Ramirez, Luka Chkhetiani, An-drew Ehrenberg, Robert McHardy, Rami Botros, Yash Khare, Andrea Vanzo, Taufiquzzaman Peyash, Gabriel Oexle, Michael Liang, et al. 2024. Anatomy of industrial scale multilingual asr. arXiv preprint arXiv:2404.09841 .Rotem Rousso, Eyal Cohen, Joseph Keshet, and Eleanor Chodroff. 2024. Tradition or innovation: A compari-son of modern asr methods for forced alignment. In 

Proc. Interspeech 2024 , pages 1525–1529. Kentaro Seki, Shinnosuke Takamichi, Takaaki Saeki, and Hiroshi Saruwatari. 2025. Ttsops: A closed-loop corpus optimization framework for training multi-speaker tts models from dark data. IEEE Transac-tions on Audio, Speech and Language Processing ,33:4956–4970. Yu Shang, Yu Li, Keyu Zhao, Likai Ma, Jiahe Liu, Fengli Xu, and Yong Li. 2024. Agentsquare: Au-tomatic llm agent search in modular design space. 

arXiv preprint arXiv:2410.06153 .Yiyou Sun, Junjie Hu, Wei Cheng, and Haifeng Chen. 2024. Dfa-rag: Conversational semantic router for large language model with definite finite automaton. In International Conference on Machine Learning .KVN Sunitha and M Charan Teja. Shodhika bhashini multilingual search and tts system. Jiabin Tang, Tianyu Fan, and Chao Huang. 2025. Au-toagent: A fully-automated and zero-code framework for llm agents. arXiv e-prints , pages arXiv–2502. VAANI Team. 2025. Vaani: Capturing the language landscape for an inclusive digital india (phase 1). 

https://vaani.iisc.ac.in/ .Ehsan Variani, Tom Bagby, Kamel Lahouel, Erik Mc-Dermott, and Michiel Bacchiani. 2018. Sampled con-nectionist temporal classification. In 2018 IEEE In-ternational Conference on Acoustics, Speech and Sig-nal Processing (ICASSP) , pages 4959–4963. IEEE. Hui Wei, Zihao Zhang, Shenghua He, Tian Xia, Shijia Pan, and Fei Liu. 2025. Plangenllms: A modern survey of llm planning capabilities. arXiv preprint arXiv:2502.11221 .Yupeng Xie, Yuyu Luo, Guoliang Li, and Nan Tang. 2024. Haichart: Human and ai paired visualization system. ArXiv , abs/2406.11033. Zihao Yi, Jiarui Ouyang, Zhe Xu, Yuwen Liu, Tianhao Liao, Haohao Luo, and Ying Shen. 2024. A survey on recent advances in llm-based multi-turn dialogue systems. arXiv preprint arXiv:2402.18013 .Guibin Zhang, Yanwei Yue, Zhixun Li, Sukwon Yun, Guancheng Wan, Kun Wang, Dawei Cheng, Jef-frey Xu Yu, and Tianlong Chen. 2024a. Cut the crap: An economical communication pipeline for llm-based multi-agent systems. arXiv preprint arXiv:2410.02506 .41459 Jiayi Zhang, Jinyu Xiang, Zhaoyang Yu, Fengwei Teng, Xionghui Chen, Jiaqi Chen, Mingchen Zhuge, Xin Cheng, Sirui Hong, Jinlin Wang, et al. 2024b. Aflow: Automating agentic workflow generation. arXiv preprint arXiv:2410.10762 .Li Zhong, Zilong Wang, and Jingbo Shang. 2024. De-bug like a human: A large language model debugger via verifying runtime execution step by step. In An-nual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics .Yizhang Zhu, Shiyin Du, Boyan Li, Yuyu Luo, and Nan Tang. 2024. Are large language models good statisticians? ArXiv , abs/2406.07815. Mingchen Zhuge, Wenyi Wang, Louis Kirsch, Francesco Faccio, Dmitrii Khizbullin, and Jürgen Schmidhuber. 2024. GPTSwarm: Language agents as optimizable graphs. In Forty-first International Conference on Machine Learning .

A Appendix 

In the Appendix, we provide: 1. Section B: Compute Infrastructure 2. Section C: Dataset Composition 3. Section D: SpeechQM-Dataset 4. Section E: Data Quality Verification Frame-work 5. Section F: Case Study Example 6. Section G: Tasks Information 7. Section H: Further Analysis 8. Section I: Future Directions 9. Section J: Prompts 

B Compute Infrastructure 

Compute details : For all our pre-training and fine-tuning experiments, we used two NVIDIA A100-SXM4-80GB GPUs. Each training requires 4-48 hours. 

Software and Packages details : We implement all our models in PyTorch 5.

B.1 Inference Cost 

Table 8 compares the inference costs across LLMs, showing that open-source models like LLaMA-3.3-70B and LLaMA-3.1-8B are substantially cheaper than GPT variants, making them attractive for large-scale deployment. 

> 5https://pytorch.org/

Model Cost 

gpt-4o-mini $0.06 

gpt-4.1-mini $0.08 

llama-3.3-70b < $0.03 

llama-3.1-8b $0.02 

deepseek-r1 $0.05 

> Table 8: Inference cost (USD / 1K tokens) per 1,000 tokens for different LLMs.

C Dataset Composition 

To evaluate the robustness of our audio and tran-script quality control mechanisms, we constructed a synthetic dataset with intentional flaws from the LAHAJA dataset and custom-generated data. The dataset comprises four subsets to test specific qual-ity control aspects across diverse error profiles and sources. - Vendor A (Audio-Specific): Applied QC1 transformations (e.g., File Format Conversion, Cor-rupt File Simulation, Sample Rate Reduction) to 3,000 LAHAJA entries (1,000 individual, 1,000 paired, 1,000 multiple QC1). - Vendor B (Transcript Quality): Applied QC2 transformations (e.g., Audio-Transcript Mis-alignment, Script Inconsistency, Transcript De-normalization) to 3,000 LAHAJA entries (1,000 individual, 1,000 paired, 1,000 multiple QC2). - Vendor C (Mixed Flaws): Applied both QC1 and QC2 transformations to 100 random LAHAJA entries for combined audio-transcript testing. - Vendor D (Synthetic Data): Generated an in-dependent dataset using LLMs and TTS models for synthetic audio and transcripts with controlled quality parameters. 

C.1 Additional Data Information   

> Figure 4: Distribution of speakers in the SpeechQM-Dataset by native language accent (left) and age group (right). The dataset exhibits broad linguistic diversity, with representation from 19 native languages, and cov-ers a wide range of age groups, ensuring demographic balance for robust speech technology evaluation.

41460 Domain Setting LLM Used                                                                   

> Indian Agri. Village farm on crops GPT Models Agri fair innovations GPT Models Rural sustainable workshop Llama Model Farmers’ crop tips Llama Model School farm trip DeepSeek Indian Law Mock court basics GPT Models Library governance talk GPT Models Civic rights discussion Llama Model Town hall governance Llama Model Constitution lecture DeepSeek Indian Finance Budgeting workshop GPT Models Digital banking expo GPT Models Savings community chat Llama Model Loan process at bank Llama Model Banks’ role in class DeepSeek Indian Sports Sports event at park GPT Models Movie event planning GPT Models Fitness benefits in gym Llama Model Dance prep in area Llama Model Cinema fan club DeepSeek Indian Military Fitness drills camp GPT Models Military history talk GPT Models Veterans’ community event Llama Model Defence awareness seminar Llama Model Armed forces career fair DeepSeek Indian Politics Democracy school talk GPT Models Political history session GPT Models Civic duties debate Llama Model Voting cultural event Llama Model Civic podcast DeepSeek Indian Edu. Rural learning school GPT Models Student science fair GPT Models Exam study group Llama Model Parent-teacher engagement Llama Model University education day DeepSeek Indian Science Tech innovation exhibit GPT Models Basic coding workshop GPT Models Tech future school club Llama Model Eco-tech startup hub Llama Model Digital tools outreach DeepSeek Indian Rural Dev. Infrastructure village meet GPT Models Sanitation campaign GPT Models Amenities workshop Llama Model Renewable energy event Llama Model Model village project DeepSeek Indian Business Entrepreneurship fair GPT Models Small business seminar GPT Models Trade at marketplace Llama Model Supply-demand class Llama Model Financial planning DeepSeek Indian Art Art evolution exhibit GPT Models Cultural fair performance GPT Models Modern art club Llama Model Architecture history Llama Model Heritage preservation DeepSeek

Table 9: Domains and Settings with LLM Attribution 

It includes 15.51 hours of Hindi speech data from 110 unique speakers, with a balanced gender split of 54 female and 56 male. Speakers cover age groups of 18-30, 30-45, 45-60, and 60+, and repre-sent 19 native languages, led by Telugu, Malay-alam, Bengali, Hindi, and others (Fig 4). The dataset spans 11 domains, including agriculture and science and technology, across 55 conversational settings (Table 9). Its strength lies in its extensive demographic and linguistic diversity, paired with broad domain coverage, making it a vital tool for inclusive speech technologies. 

D SpeechQM-Dataset 

We develop SpeechQM-Dataset, a synthetic dataset generation framework powered by multi-LLMs. As illustrated in Figure 5, the pipeline simulates real-istic conversational interactions, diverse speaker characteristics, and common ASR artifacts, pro-ducing structured audio-text pairs annotated with rich metadata. Unlike prior synthetic pipelines fo-cused on text-only generation, SpeechQM-Dataset integrates dialogue planning, cross-lingual transla-tion, perturbation, and TTS-driven synthesis into a unified workflow tailored for speech quality verifi-cation. 1. Prompt Initialization : The pipeline begins with a carefully designed prompt (Figure 5, Step 1) encoding task-specific intent, speaker roles, or domain constraints. This is passed to an LLM agent that orchestrates conversation planning. 2. Conversation Generation : An LLM agent (Step 3) generates multi-turn dialogue from the prompt, simulating realistic human interactions. Long-form in-context examples improve coherence and pragmatic diversity. A controller agent (Step 2) may invoke an LLM-as-a-Judge to monitor fac-tuality and conversational realism. 3. Translation : Conversations are translated into one or more low-resource languages using multilingual LLMs or specialized modules (Step 5), ensuring coverage and supporting cross-lingual generalization. 4. Metadata Extraction : A parsing module extracts fine-grained metadata, including turn seg-mentation, utterance boundaries, intent types, and context tags (Steps 6-7). 5. Probabilistic Perturbation : Controlled vari-ability is introduced through randomized opera-tions such as tag insertion (e.g., <noise> , <html> ), token swaps, or word-level noise (Step 8). The 41461 Prompt Conversation         

> Conv. Details
> Final json/xml Files
> random() >𝛂 ?
> Speaker Details swap.
> Yes No
> Translation
> S1 :
> S2 :
> S1 :
> Speakers
> TTS Model
> Transcript
> Audios
> Syn. Data
> Corrupt.
> Both Audio or Transcript
> 10 89
> 6
> 423
> 57
> 13
> 11
> 1
> +
> +
> A
> B

+A B

> fun1() +fun2()
> LLM-as-a-Judge

Figure 5: SpeechQM-Dataset generation pipeline. Each numbered step corresponds to an LLM or tool-based operation within the multi-LLM workflow. 

perturbation is applied according to a threshold parameter α which simulates the variation of the structured data. 6. Speaker Attribution : Synthetic speaker IDs are assigned to utterances (Step 9) to simulate multi-speaker settings. These annotations condi-tion downstream TTS synthesis, enabling diversity in voice, accent, prosody, and gender. 7. TTS-driven Audio Synthesis : A TTS model synthesizes audio from transcripts and speaker metadata (Step 13). Speaker-conditioned synthesis ensures demographic and prosodic diversity. 8. Optional corruption : To mimic real-world ASR challenges, both audio and transcripts may be selectively corrupted (e.g., dropped tokens, clip-ping). These corrupted variants support robustness evaluation (left branch of “Syn. Data”). 9. Structured Conversion : The final outputs, including transcripts, metadata, and audio files, are exported in standardized formats ( .json , .xml ) for compatibility with the downstream QC tasks (Step B). 10. Post-Processing and Validation : Custom functions (e.g., fun1() , fun2() , Step 11) perform final consistency checks and metadata linking. An LLM-as-a-Judge (Gu et al., 2024a) may be invoked at multiple stages (Steps 2, 4, 6, 10) to detect miss-ing information or hallucinations. Overall, this pipeline provides fine-grained control over dataset characteristics while leveraging LLM-based creativity, yielding a benchmark tailored for evaluating and training multi-agent speech verifica-tion systems. 

E Data Quality Verification Framework 

Figure 6 illustrates the two-stage data quality ver-ification framework implemented in SpeechQM-Agent. QC1: Audio and Metadata Verification. 

As shown in the left panel of Figure 6, QC1 begins by applying a multilingual language identification model to determine the spoken language directly from the audio (Step 1). Subsequent checks vali-date the audio format, sampling rate, silence dura-tion, frequency upsampling artifacts, and number of channels (Step 2). To handle speaker verifica-tion, we use speaker-embedding based clustering to identify unique speakers (Step 4) and validate whether speakers are reused across batches by com-paring against known public and private datasets (Step 3). Additional statistics, such as the number of speakers (Step 5) and total speaking time per speaker (Step 6), are computed to assess speaker diversity and duration balance. 

QC2: Transcript and Content Verification. 

The right panel of Figure 6 depicts QC2, which starts by aligning the transcript with the correspond-41462 Speech Audio Data  

> Public Speech Dataset
> Speaker Embedding Private Speech Dataset

# +        

> Verify Speaker
> Language Identifier # Channels
> # Hrs of Silence Frequency
> # of Hrs
> Format
> Transcript Data
> Audio & Transcript Matching
> Quality of Transcript Verify Domain
> Verify Grapheme (g i)and Vocab (v i)
> Vocab List (V)

# + Verify Content  

> n-gram Matching
> CTC Score
> Mixture of Expert
> LLM Score
> # of Speakers
> A
> 1
> 2
> 3
> 4
> 5
> 6
> A1
> 2
> 3
> 4
> 5
> 6

Figure 6: Overview of the SpeechQM-Agent quality control framework. QC1 (left) verifies audio and metadata through checks such as language ID, format integrity, silence detection, and speaker diversity. QC2 (right) validates transcripts using alignment, CTC loss, WER/CER ensembles, LLM-based fluency scoring, domain classification, and duplication detection. Together, these two stages provide comprehensive coverage of audio- and text-level dataset quality. 

ing audio using a timestamp-agnostic model (Step 1). Transcript quality is scored using three different metrics: (i) Connectionist Temporal Classification (CTC) loss from a pretrained wav2vec2.0 model, (ii) Mixture-of-Experts (MoE) relative WER/CER scores from multiple ASR models, and (iii) LLM-as-a-Judge scores evaluating fluency and coherence (Step 2). Domain labels (Step 3) are inferred to en-sure topic coverage and diversity. Further checks analyze the distribution of graphemes (Characters) and vocabulary rarity (Step 4), using an internal vo-cabulary list (Step 5). Finally, content duplication is measured using n-gram and embedding-based overlap with both intra-dataset and public corpus references (Step 6). 

F Case Study Example 

To illustrate the functionality of SpeechQM-Agent, we present a concrete example (Figure 7). The user submits the following natural language query: 

“Check the audio files of the speech dataset on sample rate, audio file cor-ruption, and domain with audio_dir: 

xyz/test/ .” 

The Orchestrator Agent parses this query and decomposes it into four atomic verification tasks: (1) validate the audio sampling rate, (2) detect cor-rupted files, (3) generate transcripts, and (4) infer domain labels from transcripts. A Prompt Checker ensures the task list is com-plete and consistent (e.g., enforcing that transcript generation precedes domain inference). It re-verifies selected tasks and iteratively patches miss-ing ones (up to three iterations) before graph build. 

Figure 7: Illustrative example of SpeechQM-Agent exe-cuting a user query. The user requests checks on sample rate, file corruption, and domain inference for an in-put directory. The Orchestrator Agent decomposes the query into atomic tasks, validates them, and constructs a DAG workflow via topological sorting. Each node is executed within the Execution Block using either pre-defined agent nodes, dynamic Python REPL tools, or reusable predefined modules. Intermediate results are stored in a shared state dictionary and aggregated into structured outputs (e.g., CSV reports). This case study highlights the system’s ability to translate natural lan-guage instructions into end-to-end, dependency-aware verification pipelines. 

The validated list is then compiled into a directed acyclic graph (DAG), where dependencies are ex-plicitly encoded. Topological sorting guarantees that independent checks (e.g., sample rate and cor-ruption detection) run in parallel, while dependent tasks follow sequential order. The Constrained topological scheduling and node-level validators are used in the pipeline to prevent hallucination (Task Selection / Topological Sorting / Prompt Checker prompts in Appx. J) . 41463 Each DAG node is mapped to an execution agent: - Predefined Agent Nodes (e.g., 

sample_rate_agent ) handle standard checks such as verifying whether each file is at 16 kHz or 8 kHz. - Python REPL Tool is invoked for low-level operations such as scanning directories or reading audio headers. - Predefined Tools (e.g., silence detectors, WER scorers) are reused for stability. Intermediate outputs are stored in a shared State Dictionary , ensuring later tasks (e.g., domain inference) can access transcripts generated earlier. The final results are compiled into structured CSV files. For example, the sample-rate check produces a file with entries of the form: 

FilePath | Samp R -----------------|--------xyz/test/a1.wav | 16000 xyz/test/a2.wav | Invalid 

This case study highlights how SpeechQM-Agent automatically translates a single user query into a multi-step verification workflow as shown in Figure 8. The system dynamically integrates LLM-synthesized tools with reusable predefined modules, respects dependencies through DAG or-chestration, and outputs human-interpretable re-ports. This functionality demonstrates the prac-ticality and flexibility of our agentic design for large-scale speech dataset verification. 

> Figure 8: Complete audio processing summary for di-rectory xyz/test/ including speaker diarization metrics, Voice Activity Detection (VAD) silence analysis, and comprehensive quality control validation

G Tasks Information 

SpeechQM-Agent implements a comprehensive suite of verification modules that span both audio (QC1) and transcript/content (QC2) modalities, en-abling fine-grained inspection of speech datasets (Table 10). Together, QC1 and QC2 provide 24 modular checks covering file integrity, speaker diversity, linguistic correctness, and content variety. This dual-stage design enables SpeechQM-Agent to de-tect both low-level anomalies (e.g., corrupted au-dio, missing metadata) and high-level linguistic er-rors (e.g., script inconsistency, domain imbalance), making it suitable for benchmarking multilingual, low-resource speech datasets. 

H Further Analysis 

Table 11 shows that while GPT-4.1-mini and LLaMA-3.3-70B maintain high accuracy across QC2 tasks, LLaMA-3.1-8B performs poorly ,with accuracies dropping below 30% and frequent task failures. This weakness stems from two fac-tors: (i) its smaller scale limits compositional rea-soning over multi-step workflows, and (ii) unlike larger models, it has been trained on comparatively less (or no) Indic language data, making it ill-suited for tasks involving script consistency, translitera-tion, and code-mixing checks. As a result, the model struggles to interpret instructions and gen-erate valid verification outputs, highlighting the importance of both model capacity and linguistic coverage for robust dataset quality control. Table 12 presents a comparative analysis of LLM performance in QC1 tasks involving audio and metadata verification. Among all evaluated mod-els, GPT-4o-mini exhibited the most reliable be-havior, successfully completing all five tasks, in-cluding file format validation, corruption detec-tion, sample rate checking, speaker duration es-timation and speaker validity matching. GPT-4.1-mini also performed well in most categories but failed to handle valid speaker identification cor-rectly. In contrast, LLaMA-3.3-70b completed all core tasks, but introduced unnecessary operations, indicating weaker task-grounding. In particular, LLaMA-3.1-8b, while the fastest model, failed to perform most tasks and struggled with topological reasoning and task mapping. DeepSeek-R1 demon-strated partial success in speaker tasks, but did not engage with other checks and required more iter-ations. These results highlight the trade-offs be-tween speed, instruction-following capability, and task reliability across model families, reinforcing the need for instruction-based evaluation in speech data quality workflows. 41464 QC1: Audio & Metadata Verification (11 tasks)                

> ASR Transcription Speaker count & duration Audio length Silence calculation (VAD) Upsampling check Speaker identity (new vs. old) Audio corruption check Audio format / extension check Sample rate check Speaker duration stats Language ID (ASR + IndicLID)
> QC2: Transcript & Content Verification (13 tasks)
> Transcript quality Grapheme / character stats Vocabulary stats Language verification English word counter CTC score Domain classification Transcript-audio alignment Transcript normalization (tags removal) Transcript coherence (LLM-as-a-Judge) Transliteration (Ro-man →Native) Utterance duplicate check / WER computation

Table 10: Overview of the 24 verification tasks implemented in SpeechQM-Agent, grouped into QC1 (au-dio/metadata) and QC2 (transcript/content).                                

> Model Task Accuracy Hallucination GPT-4o-mini QC2-1 92.34 0QC2-2 91.49 0QC2-3 47.99 0
> gpt-4.1-mini QC2-1 100 57.21 QC2-2 100 10.89 QC2-3 98.07 6.35
> llama-3.1-8b QC2-1 27.64 10.57 QC2-2 18.02 0QC2-3 00
> llama-3.3-70b QC2-1 100 0QC2-2 95.74 0QC2-3 91.58 0

Table 11: Evaluation of different LLMs on quality con-trol tasks (QC2-1 to QC2-3) measuring Accuracy and Hallucination rate in percent. 

Table 13 reveals substantial metric-coverage gaps: none of the QC-1 audio-metadata checks (format integrity, silence detection, up-sampling, language ID, speaker diversity or reuse) are logged, and several critical QC-2 dimensions, segmenta-tion accuracy, CER, LLM-as-a-judge agreement, transliteration accuracy, vocabulary diversity, do-main match, and duplication detection, remain un-populated or only partially captured. Closing these gaps will require integrating raw SoX/ffprobe di-agnostics, diarisation statistics, IndicTrans compar-isons, lexical-entropy measures and embedding-based duplication scores, enabling a truly end-to-end, metrics-complete evaluation pipeline for fu-ture batches. 

H.1 Performance of LLMs on IndicVoice Dataset 

Table 15 presents the domain classification perfor-mance of different LLMs in zero-shot and few-shot (7-shot) settings on the IndicVoice validation subset (Javed et al., 2024b) of 500 utterances. DeepSeek-R1 achieves the highest accuracy across all condi-tions, with 45.6 in domain generalization, 0.456 in zero-shot classification, and 0.386 in few-shot classification. Its superior performance can be attributed to its reasoning-centric design, which enables it to capture contextual cues more effec-tively and make consistent domain assignments. In contrast, smaller models such as LLaMA-3.1-8B-Instant demonstrate weaker adaptability to domain variability. These results highlight the importance of reasoning-oriented LLMs in improving domain classification robustness for multi-domain Indic speech datasets. Furthermore, the relatively low WER observed in this setting can be explained by the nature of the utterances. For example, when a speaker refers to a “vessel,” the utterance could plausibly belong to either the Daily Life Conver-sation domain (household usage) or the Product Review domain (product evaluation). Since both interpretations are semantically close and share overlapping vocabulary, therefore, it is difficult to identify the domain correctly. 

I Future Directions 

While SpeechQM-Agent demonstrates strong per-formance in synthetic and vendor datasets, several avenues remain open to advancing both scope and methodology. First, we aim to develop SpeechQM-Agent+ , a dynamic extension capable of syn-thesizing new QC tasks on the fly from quires from natural language, enabling adaptation to emerging dataset standards and modalities. Sec-ond, to address current gaps such as dialect im-balance detection and speaker bias auditing, we plan to integrate clustering-based dialect tagging, metadata-speech alignment, and distributional fair-ness checks. Third, scaling to 100k-hour corpora re-quires distributed execution and scheduling optimi-sations; we will explore hybrid orchestration strate-gies combining LLM planners with lightweight 41465 LLMs File Corrupt Sample Speaker Valid Format File Rate (Duration) Speaker 

llama-3.1-8b NP NP NP NP (2/3) NP 

llama-3.3-70b C C C C C

deepseek-r1 NP NP NP C NP 

gpt-4.1-mini C C C C Failed 

gpt-4o-mini C C C C C

Table 12: Performance of LLMs on QC1 verification tasks. Each model is evaluated on its ability to execute file format validation, corruption detection, sample rate checks, speaker duration analysis, and valid speaker matching. Remarks provide qualitative insights into model’s behavior during task execution. (NP - Not Performing, C -Completed) 

Protocol Block Metric In Sheet? Missing Evidence / Action 

QC1 - Audio & Metadata 

File format & corruption Accuracy 2 Log SoX/ffprobe checks per file Silence hours Precision/Recall 2 Duration histograms with silence detector Upsampling (8 →16 kHz) Binary accuracy 2 FFT-based up-sampling flag per file Language ID (MMS) Accuracy 2 MMS predictions + meta-tags Speaker hours / diversity Completeness, SDI 2 Diarisation output, per-ID hours Speaker reuse detection Match-rate 2 Embedding match vs. public pools 

QC2 - Transcript & Content 

Audio-text alignment WER, CER 1 CER still missing Segmentation by timestamps Seg. accuracy 2 Gold vs. predicted boundaries Script validity Script-match % 3 Need total-token denominator CTC quality score Avg. CTC 1 -LLM-as-Judge rating 1-5 score, 2 Per-utt. ratings + agreement Normalization noise HTML-error rate 1 Tag counts → rate per K tokens Transliteration match Accuracy 2 IndicTrans vs. transcript tokens Vocab / grapheme diversity Diversity score 2 Entropy or TTR statistics Domain verification Domain-match 3 Need gold domain labels Duplication detection Dup. score 3 Embedding-similarity counts 

Table 13: Coverage of the full QC-metric suite. 1 = logged, 2 = partially logged, 3 = not present. 

rule-based controllers to reduce cost and latency. Fourth, we envision extending the framework be-yond speech to multimodal data curation, including OCR datasets, vision-language corpora, and con-versational agents, positioning dataset verification as a unified agentic AI problem. Finally, incorpo-rating formal guarantees on workflow soundness and hallucination containment, e.g., using schema validation, consistency checks, and LLM-as-judge ensembles, offers a path toward provably reliable agentic QC systems. 

J Prompts 41466 Error Type Hours / Files Affected Vendor Batches Low sample rate (Hindi) 800 hrs Hindi vendor (B1) Mis-scripted transcripts (Assamese, Marathi) 100 hrs Assamese + 200 hrs Marathi Assamese (B1), Marathi (B2) Silence-only audio 200 hrs Multi-vendor (12k hrs total) Proxy speakers 200 hrs Proxy vendor batch Misaligned audio-transcript pairs 100 hrs Vendor B2 Duplicate audio-transcript (cross-vendor) 500 hrs Across vendors/languages Corrupted audio files 987 files Batch B1 (Hindi) 

Table 14: Summary of errors flagged by SpeechQM-Agent on real vendor datasets.             

> Model Zero-Shot 7-Shot
> gpt-4o-mini 0.314 0.254
> gpt-4.1-mini 0.360 0.340
> deepseek-r1 0.456 0.386
> llama-3.1-8b 0.180 0.110
> llama-3.3-70b 0.338 0.352

Table 15: Performance of different models on the In-dicVoice validation subset (500 utterances) across zero-shot and 7-shot settings. 41467 Natural Language Prompt 

Prompt: 

You are given the following functions: 1. ASR Transcription 2. Number of Speakers calculation and duration per speaker 3. Quality of Transcript 4. Graphene or character calculation 5. Vocab calculation 6. Language identification 7. Audio length calculation 8. Silence calculation (using VAD) 9. Sample rate check 10. CTC score calculation 11. Upsampling Check 12. Check if speakers are new or old 13. Check the domain of the speech dataset 14. Map transcriptions to audio files using forced alignment 15. Language identification using ASR transcriptions and IndicLID 16. Normalization by removing HTML and other tags from transcriptions in JSON or XML files 17. Evaluate transcript coherence and fluency using LLM-as-a-Judge and score out of 10 18. Transliteration - Convert Roman script words to Native script using Transliteration for a specified file and language Based on the prompt, Convert the user’s natural-language request into a concise, ordered set of task steps that use ONLY the allowed functions listed without any explanation or reasoning. 

Input: 

Prompt: {user_prompt} 

Output: 

Task Plan - numbered steps, each step must include: - Function: <one of the allowed functions> - Parameters: <explicit settings if relevant, else “default”> Optional: Not possible with current functions - (default) all the functions. 

Guidelines: 

1) Use only the allowed functions. Do not invent new tools or steps like “play audio” or “detect corruption” unless you can map them to an allowed function (e.g., corruption can be approximated via ASR failure patterns, duration anomalies, forced alignment failures, or CTC score). 2) Choose the MINIMUM set of functions needed to satisfy the user’s intent, but ensure coverage of: - Audio validity/quality checks when user mentions “play properly / clear / quality” - Content understanding when user asks “what kind of content / domain” 41468 3) Default ordering (modify only if required by user intent): - Basic audio integrity + metadata: Audio length calculation → Sample rate check → Upsampling Check → Silence calculation (using VAD) - Core transcription: ASR Transcription - Post-processing: Normalization (if transcripts are in JSON/XML or noisy markup) →

Transliteration (if Roman words must be native) - Quality scoring: Quality of Transcript → CTC score calculation → LLM-as-a-Judge coher-ence/fluency - Dataset characterization: Language identification (or IndicLID using transcripts) → Domain detection → Speaker analysis (if multi-speaker concerns) - Alignment: Forced alignment mapping when user needs time-marks, segment mapping, or verification between audio and text. 4) If the user asks for “language,” prefer: - If audio-only: Language identification - If transcripts exist or you will generate them: Language identification using ASR transcriptions and IndicLID 5) If user asks “are these speakers new or old,” include: - Number of Speakers calculation and duration per speaker - Check if speakers are new or old 6) If user asks for “dataset stats,” include: - Graphene or character calculation, Vocab calculation 7) Keep the plan actionable: each step must correspond to exactly one allowed function. 

EXAMPLE (style only; do not copy content) 

User: “Check audio quality and tell me domain.” Plan: 1) Sample rate check... 2) Silence calculation (using VAD)... 3) ASR Transcription... 4) Check the domain of the speech dataset... 41469 Task Selection Prompt 

Prompt: 

You are given the following functions: 1. ASR Transcription 2. Number of Speakers calculation and duration per speaker 3. Quality of Transcript 4. Graphene or character calculation 5. Vocab calculation 6. Language identification 7. Audio length calculation 8. Silence calculation (using VAD) 9. Sample rate check 10. CTC score calculation 11. Upsampling Check 12. Check if speakers are new or old 13. Check the domain of the speech dataset 14. Map transcriptions to audio files using forced alignment 15. Language identification using ASR transcriptions and IndicLID 16. Normalization by removing HTML and other tags from transcriptions in JSON or XML files 17. Evaluate transcript coherence and fluency using LLM-as-a-Judge and score out of 10 18. Transliteration - Convert Roman script words to Native script using Transliteration for a specified file and language Based on the prompt, reply with task numbers that have to be done without any explanation or reasoning. 

Input: 

Prompt: {user_prompt} 

Output Format: 

Example: 1,3,5 41470 Topological Sorting Prompt 

Prompt: 

You are given the following functions: 1. ASR Transcription using audio files 2. Number of Speakers calculation and duration per speaker using audio files 3. Quality of Transcript using transcriptions 4. Graphene or character calculation using transcriptions 5. Vocab calculation using transcriptions 6. Language identification using transcriptions 7. Audio length calculation using audio files 8. Silence calculation (using VAD) using audio files 9. Sample rate check using audio files 10. CTC score calculation using audio files and transcriptions 11. Upsampling Check using audio files 12. Check if speakers are new or old using the results from number of speakers calculation 13. Check the domain of the speech dataset using transcriptions from ASR 14. Map transcriptions to audio files using forced alignment, using ground truth transcriptions 15. Language identification using ASR transcriptions and IndicLID, using transcriptions from ASR 16. Normalization by removing HTML and other tags from transcriptions in JSON or XML files 17. Evaluate transcript coherence and fluency using LLM-as-a-Judge and score out of 10, using transcriptions from ASR 18. Transliteration - Convert Roman script words to Native script using Transliteration, using a specified file and language code from the prompt We have to do tasks: {resp_1}. Make a Topological sorting for what is the best way to proceed with these tasks, sequentially and concurrently. 

Guidelines: 

- We can do tasks concurrently if they are independent of each other. - Task 12 depends on task 2. - Task 13 depends on task 1. - Task 14 depends on the ground truth conversion process. - Task 15 depends on task 1. - Task 17 depends on task 1. - Task 18 is independent. 

Output Format: 

Example: [[1,3], [5], [8]] (this means do 1 and 3 concurrently, then do 5, and finally do 8) Finally, give me the topological sorting for the tasks: {resp_1} without any explanation or reasoning. 41471 Input Source Determination Prompt 

Prompt: 

Determine the source of the following inputs for task {task_id}: {json.dumps(required_inputs, indent=2)} 

Parameters: 

Possible sources: - User prompt: {state.get(’user_prompt’, ”)} - Previous task outputs in CombinedStateDict: {json.dumps(k: v for k, v in state.items() if k not in [’folder_path’, ’user_prompt’, ’execution_log’, ’task_inputs’, ’topological_sort’], indent=2)} - Default: folder_path={state.get(’folder_path’, ”)} 

Output Format: 

Return a JSON object mapping each input to its source value or an error message if not found. 

Corruption Check Prompt 

Prompt: 

You are given a folder with audios at this path: {state[’folder_path’]}. Write a Python script to: - Attempt to open and read each audio file. - If a file fails to load or raises an error, mark it as corrupted and capture the error message. Save a CSV listing all files and their status ("Corrupt" or "Valid") as audio_validity.csv in the same directory. Finally, Respond with "Success" if all files are valid, otherwise "Invalid". 

Audio Extension and Format Check Prompt 

Prompt: 

You are given a folder with audios at this path: {state[’folder_path’]}. Write a Python script to: 1. Confirm that each file except {file_path} has a valid audio extension (only .wav or .mp3). Ignore files with extensions: .csv, .xml, and .json (do not process, validate or flag them). 2. For audio files, also check if they are in WAV format by attempting to read them using a library like wave or librosa. 3. Create a CSV with columns: Filename, Valid_Extension, Is_WAV_Format , Status 4. Status should be "Pass" only if both extension is valid and format is WAV. 5. Save the CSV as audio_format_check .csv in the same directory. Respond with "Success" if all files pass, otherwise "Invalid". 41472 Sample Rate Check Prompt 

Prompt: 

You are given a folder with audio files at this path: {state[’folder_path’]}. Write a Python script to: 1. Check each audio file’s sample rate 2. Create a CSV with columns: Filename, Sample_Rate, Status 3. Store "Pass" in Status if sample rate is 16000 Hz, otherwise "Fail" 4. Save the CSV as sample_rate_check .csv in the same directory Use libraries like librosa, soundfile, or wave to check the sample rate. 

Ground Truth File Conversion Prompt 

Prompt: 

You are given a file of ground truths of audios {state[’folder_path’]} at {file_path}. 1. Get the structure of the txt, csv, json, xml file. 2. Identify the element/column that contains the filename and transcriptions (ground truth). If there is no such column, return "Invalid". 3. Convert the file to CSV with added columns of Filename and Transcription. 4. Save the updated CSV with the new column to the same directory as new_transcriptions.csv. Finally, Respond with "Success" if all steps are done, otherwise "Invalid". 41473 Conversation Generation Prompt 

Prompt: 

You are a conversation generator tasked with creating realistic dialogue between exactly two speakers in English. Topic: {topic} Setting: {setting} Speakers: {speaker1} and {speaker2} 

Requirements: 

- The conversation must be rich in content related to the specified topic and reflect the given setting. - Generate a long conversation with approximately 100 dialogue exchanges. - Format the output strictly as: {speaker1}: sentence1 {speaker2}: sentence2 {speaker1}: sentence3 ...and so on. - Do not include any explanations, actions, or additional text outside the conversation format. - Ensure the conversation flows naturally and is meaningful with detailed exchanges relevant to the setting and topic. 

Output: 

Translation Prompt 

Prompt: 

Translate the following sentence into {language} while maintaining realism and natural flow. 

Guidelines: 

- The conversation should primarily be in {language}, but preserve certain English words commonly used by {language} speakers. - Enclose all preserved English words within <eng>...</eng> tags. - Randomly and sparsely insert conversational effect tags such as [babble], [bg-speech], [laugh], [music], [no-speech], [noise], [overlap], or [silence]. - Use <initial>...</initial> tags for any initials or abbreviations. - Avoid overusing English words and tags; include them only when contextually appropriate. - Output only the translated sentence without any explanation. 

Input: 

Sentence: {content} 

Output Format: 

Translation: [Translated sentence will be provided here in the specified format with appropriate tags.] 41474 Conversation Metadata Prompt 

Prompt: 

Generate conversation metadata based on the provided conversation content. 

Input: 

Conversation: {translated_content} 

Output Format: 

Generate conversation metadata in the following JSON format: {"domain":"<domain>","topic":"<topic>","language":"{language}","conversation_name":"{conv_id}-GPT"} 

Instructions: 

- Determine the "domain" and "topic" based on the conversation content. - Set "language" to the predominant language of the conversation. - Use the provided "conversation_name" as is. - Provide only the raw JSON string without any explanation or formatting wrappers. 41475 Speaker Details Prompt 

Prompt: 

Generate speaker information for two speakers based on the provided conversation content. 

Input: 

Conversation: {translated_content} 

Output Format: 

Generate speaker information for {speaker1} and {speaker2} in the following JSON format: {"{speaker1}": { "speakers": [ {"gender": "<male or female>", "speakerId": "<alphanumeric ID>", "recorderId": "<alphanumeric ID>", "nativity": "{language}", "ageRange": "<age range like 25-34>" }]}, "{speaker2}": { "speakers": [ {"gender": "<male or female>", "speakerId": "<alphanumeric ID>", "recorderId": "<alphanumeric ID>", "nativity": "{language}", "ageRange": "<age range like 35-44>" }]}}

Instructions: 

- Follow the exact JSON structure shown above with all opening and closing braces properly matched. - Randomly assign values for "gender" (choose either "male" or "female"). - For "speakerId", use a format like "S-XXXXX" where X is a digit. - For "recorderId", use a format like "RXXX" where X is a digit. - Set "nativity" to exactly "{language}" as provided. - For "ageRange", use one of these formats: "18-24", "25-34", "35-44", "45-54", "55-64", "65+". - Ensure the JSON is properly formatted and valid - all quotes, commas, and braces must be correctly placed. - Provide only the raw JSON string without any explanation, markdown formatting, or code blocks. 41476 Transcription Function Prompt 

Prompt: 

Transcribe audio files from a specified folder and return the transcription output in CSV format. This task assumes that all audio files are in Hindi. 

Input: 

- A folder path containing audio files. - The folder must exist and be a valid directory. - All audio files should be in Hindi. 

Output Format: 

A dictionary with the following structure: {"A" [where A is node in the node graph]: "<CSV transcription result or error message>", "audio_dir": "<Path to the input folder>" }

Instructions: 

- Validate that the provided folder path exists and is a directory. - If invalid, return the error message: "A": "Error: Invalid audio directory" .- If valid, perform transcription of all audio files in the folder. - Use the transcribe_folder_to_csv() function for transcription. - Assume the source language is "Hindi". - Log the transcription process using appropriate logging levels (info and error). - Return the transcription results in the key "A" along with the input directory. 

Silence Detection Prompt 

Prompt: 

Perform silence detection on all audio files within a specified directory and return the result. 

Input: 

- A directory path containing audio files to be processed. - The folder must exist and be a valid directory. 

Output Format: 

A dictionary with the following structure: {"D": "<Silence detection result or error message>" }

Instructions: 

- Check if the provided audio directory exists and is valid. - If the directory is invalid or not found, return the error message: "D": "Error: Invalid audio directory" .- If valid, apply silence detection to all audio files in the directory using the process_folder_vad() 

function. - Log the beginning of the detection process with an info-level message. - Return the result under the key "D". 41477 Vocabulary Extraction Prompt 

Prompt: 

Extract unique words (vocabulary) from the transcriptions in a CSV file and save them into a new column. Output the updated CSV with the extracted vocabulary. 

Input: 

- A directory containing a CSV file, typically named indicconf_hypothesis.csv .- The CSV must have a column named Transcription or Ground_Truth (case-insensitive). 

Output Format: 

A dictionary in the following format: {"vocab_output": "<Path to vocab_list.csv or error message>" }

Instructions: 

- Locate the CSV file using the key "A" in state, or fallback to 

audio_dir/indicconf_hypothesis.csv .- If the file doesn’t exist, return: "vocab_output": "Error: CSV file <path> not found" .- Within the CSV, identify the transcription column by searching for ’Transcription’ or ’Ground_Truth’ (case-insensitive). - For each row, extract a list of **unique words** from the transcription. - Store the list in a new column named vocab_list .- Save the updated CSV as vocab_list.csv in the same directory. - Return "vocab_output": "CSV saved at: <path>" if successful. - If the agent fails to complete the task or the file is not created, return an appropriate error message. - Handle and log all exceptions clearly. 41478 Character Extraction Prompt 

Prompt: 

Extract unique characters from each transcription in a CSV file and save them into a new column. Output the updated CSV with the extracted characters. 

Input: 

- A directory containing a CSV file, typically named indicconf_hypothesis.csv .- The CSV must have a column named Transcription or Ground_Truth (case-insensitive). 

Output Format: 

A dictionary in the following format: {"character_output": "<Path to character_list.csv or error message>" }

Instructions: 

- Locate the CSV file using the key "A" in state, or fallback to 

audio_dir/indicconf_hypothesis.csv .- If the file doesn’t exist, return: "character_output": "Error: CSV file <path> not found" .- Identify the transcription column by searching for ’Transcription’ or ’Ground_Truth’ (case-insensitive). - For each row, extract a list of **unique characters** from the transcription. - Store the list in a new column named character_list .- Save the updated CSV as character_list.csv in the same directory. - If the script completes successfully and the file is created, return: "character_output": "CSV saved at: <path>" .- If the agent fails or the output file is not found, return an appropriate error message. - Log any exceptions during processing clearly and accurately. 41479 Audio Length Calculation Prompt 

Prompt: 

Calculate the duration of each audio file in a given folder and save the results in a CSV file. 

Input: 

- A valid directory path containing audio files. 

Output Format: 

A dictionary in the format: {"audio_length_output": "<Result of operation or error message>" }

Instructions: 

- Check if the audio_dir exists and is a directory. If invalid, return: "audio_length_output": "Error: Invalid audio directory" .- Write a Python script that performs the following tasks: 1. Iterate over all audio files in the directory. 2. Calculate the duration of each audio file in seconds. 3. Store the filename and corresponding duration in a CSV with columns: Filename ,

Audio_length .4. Save the resulting CSV as audio_length.csv in the same folder. - Execute the script using the [python_repl] tool. - Return the script’s output message under the key "audio_length_output" .- In case of failure or exceptions, return an appropriate error message. - Log errors clearly to aid debugging. 41480 Devanagari Script Verification Prompt 

Prompt: 

Verify whether each transcription in a CSV file is written in the Devanagari script using Unicode checks. 

Input: 

- Path to a CSV file (e.g., indicconf_hypothesis.csv ) with a column containing ground truth text. 

Output Format: 

A dictionary in the format: {"language_verification_output": "<Result of operation or error message>" }

Instructions: 

- Load the CSV file and identify the transcription column (case-insensitive: ’Ground_Truth’, ’Transcription’, etc.). - For each row: 1. Remove whitespace and punctuation from the transcription. 2. Check if all remaining characters fall within the Unicode range U+0900-U+097F (Devanagari script). 3. If they do, set Is_Devanagari to True ; otherwise False .4. If the transcription is empty or only punctuation, set Is_Devanagari to False .- Add a new column Is_Devanagari to the CSV. - Save the output file as language_verification.csv in the same directory. - Ensure the final CSV includes: Filename , Transcription , Is_Devanagari .- Use the [python_repl] tool to execute the script. - On success, return "Success" ; else provide an error message. - Handle edge cases and log any errors encountered. 41481 CTC Score Computation Prompt 

Prompt: 

Compute Connectionist Temporal Classification (CTC) alignment scores from audio-transcription pairs and classify alignment quality. 

Input: 

- A directory containing audio files ( audio_dir )- A CSV file (e.g., indicconf_hypothesis.csv ) with aligned transcripts, identified via key ’A’ 

Output Format: 

A dictionary in the format: {"ctc_score_output": "<CSV output path or error message>" }

Instructions: 

• Load the CSV and audio directory. • For each audio file, compute alignment scores using the transcriptions in the CSV. • Use process_audio_directory() to return segment-wise alignment with scores and times-tamps. • Aggregate results by: 

– Grouping by filename. 

– Combining the segment labels into a full transcript ( Aligned_Transcript ). 

– Taking the average CTC score as CTC_Score .

– Serializing segment-level details (label, start, end, score) into JSON under 

Aligned_Segments .• Classify the score using: 

– Good if score > 0.7 

– Medium if score > 0.5 

– Poor otherwise • Save the final CSV with columns: Filename , Aligned_Segments , Aligned_Transcript ,

CTC_Score , CTC_Status .• Output the result to ctc_scores.csv in the same directory as the input CSV. • Log and report errors appropriately. 41482 Valid Speaker Verification Prompt 

Prompt: 

Analyze speaker presence across files to determine whether a speaker is "New" or "Old" based on repetition across files. 

Input: 

- A directory containing a CSV named num_speakers.csv with columns: • File Name 

• Number of Speakers 

• Speaker Durations - JSON object mapping speaker IDs to durations 

Output Format: 

A dictionary: {"valid_speaker_output": "<CSV output path or error message>" }

Instructions: 

1. Load num_speakers.csv .2. Build a dictionary to track how many files each speaker appears in. 3. For each row: • Skip if Number of Speakers == "Error". • If only one speaker and SPEAKER_00 is reused across files, mark as Old .• If multiple speakers and any speaker is reused across files, mark as Old .• Otherwise, mark the speaker as New .4. For each row, populate: • Filename 

• Speaker_Status (New or Old )• Common_File (the current file name if status is Old , else empty) 5. Save the result to valid_speaker.csv in the same directory. 6. Respond with "Success" if the script runs without errors and file is saved. Otherwise, return "Invalid". 41483 Domain Checker Prompt 

Prompt: 

You are a Hindi language expert. Analyze the following normalized Hindi transcript and determine the general domain of the speech dataset. 

Instructions: 

• Return the domain as a single word (e.g., News , Call Center , Interview , Conversation ,

Education ). 

Input: 

A CSV file indicconf_hypothesis.csv located inside a directory, containing a column named 

transcriptions with normalized Hindi transcripts. 

Expected Output: 

A new column domain added to the CSV, representing the predicted domain of each transcription. The final output is saved as domain_check.csv in the same directory. 

Agent Behavior: 

1. Validate the input directory and CSV. 2. Iterate over each row in the transcriptions column. 3. For each transcript, send a prompt to the language model to classify the domain. 4. If the LLM fails, label the domain as Unknown .5. Save the resulting DataFrame with the new domain column to domain_check.csv .41484 IndicLID Language Identification Agent Prompt 

Prompt Objective: 

Identify the language of each transcript using the IndicLID model. 

Input Description: 

• A folder containing a CSV file (default name: indicconf_hypothesis.csv ). • The CSV should include a column named transcriptions and optionally Filename .

Instructions: 

1. For each row in the CSV: • Extract the transcript and filename. • If the transcript is empty or NaN, assign Language_Code = Unknown , Confidence = 0.0 , Model_Used = IndicLID .• Otherwise, use the IndicLID model to perform language identification. 2. If language identification fails for a transcript, mark it with Language_Code = Error .3. Store all results in a new DataFrame with columns: Filename , Transcription ,

Language_Code , Confidence , Model_Used .4. Save the output as indiclid_language_identification.csv in the same directory. 

Expected Output: 

A CSV file containing language identification results for each transcript, with confidence scores and the model used ( IndicLID ). 41485 Text Normalization and Tag Removal Agent Prompt 

Prompt Objective: 

Normalize transcription text by cleaning ground truth data in a CSV file. 

Input Description: 

• A directory containing a CSV file named indicconf_hypothesis-gt.csv .• The file should have a column named Transcriptions or ground_truth (case-insensitive). 

Instructions: 

1. Read the CSV file and identify the transcription column (Transcriptions or 

ground_truth ). 2. Clean each transcript using the following rules: • Remove HTML tags like <b> and </b> .• Remove any text enclosed in square brackets (e.g., [START] ). • Remove symbols such as #, $, and %.3. Add a new column named normalized_transcripts with the cleaned text. 4. Save the updated CSV as normalized_list.csv in the same directory. 

Expected Output: 

A new CSV file with the original columns and an additional normalized_transcripts column saved as normalized_list.csv .41486 LLM-Based Transcription Quality Scoring Agent Prompt 

Prompt Objective: 

Evaluate the fluency and coherence of ASR-generated transcriptions using a Language Model (LLM) and assign scores and comments. 

Input Description: 

• A directory path containing a CSV file named indicconf_hypothesis.csv .• The CSV contains: 

– Filename column (case-insensitive). 

– One of ground_truth or transcriptions columns (case-insensitive), containing ASR outputs. 

Instructions: 

1. Load the CSV file. 2. For each transcription: • Analyze sentence fluency and meaning very strictly. • Score each transcription from 0 to 10 :

– 10: Highly meaningful and fluent Hindi sentence. 

– 0: Nonsensical or contains language other than Hindi. 

– Gradually decrease score based on fluency degradation. • Provide a brief Evaluation_Comment justifying the score. 3. Create a new CSV file with the columns: Filename , Transcription , LLM_Score , and 

Evaluation_Comment .4. Save the output as llm_scores.csv in the same directory. 5. Handle errors gracefully during execution. 

Expected Output: 

A CSV file named llm_scores.csv containing scored and reviewed transcriptions. 41487 English Word Count Agent Prompt 

Prompt Objective: 

Determine the number of English words present in each line of a normalized transcript using an LLM. 

Input Description: 

• A directory path that contains a CSV file named normalized_list.csv .• The CSV must have a column named ground_truth , containing the transcription text. 

Instructions: 

1. Load the normalized_list.csv file. 2. For each row in the ground_truth column: • Construct a prompt asking a language expert to count the number of English words (case-insensitive) in the given text. • Extract the integer response. • If the LLM fails, assign -1 for that row. 3. Append the count as a new column called english_word_count .4. Save the updated CSV as english_word_count.csv in the same directory. 

Prompt Template: 

You are a language expert. Count and return only the number of English words (case-insensitive) in the following text. Text: 

{ground_truth_text} 

Respond with just the number. 

Expected Output: 

A CSV named english_word_count.csv containing an additional column english_word_count 

with English word frequencies per row. 41488 Utterance Duplicate Checker Agent Prompt 

Prompt Objective: 

Identify and report duplicate utterances across all text-based columns in a CSV. 

Input Description: 

• A directory containing a CSV file named normalized_list.csv .

Instructions: 

1. Load the normalized_list.csv file. 2. Iterate through each column of the DataFrame. 3. For columns with text ( dtype == object ): • Detect duplicated utterances (preserve all duplicates using keep=False ). • For each unique duplicated utterance, count the number of occurrences. • Record the column name, the duplicated utterance, and the count. 4. Save the results in a new CSV called duplicate_utterances.csv containing: • column_name , utterance , and count 

5. If no duplicates are found, return a message indicating that. 

Expected Output: 

• A CSV file named duplicate_utterances.csv if duplicates exist. • Otherwise, a message stating "No duplicate utterances found." 41489 WER Computation Agent Prompt 

Prompt Objective: 

Compute Word Error Rate (WER) between normalized reference transcriptions and predicted hypotheses. 

Input Description: 

• A directory containing two CSV files: 

– normalized_list.csv with the column normalized_transcripts .

– indicconf_hypothesis.csv with the column transcriptions .

Instructions: 

1. Ensure both CSVs exist and contain the same number of rows. 2. For each row, compute the Word Error Rate (WER) between: • Reference ← normalized_transcripts 

• Hypothesis ← transcriptions 

3. Use the jiwer library for WER calculation. 4. Handle exceptions on a per-row basis to ensure continuity even if some rows fail. 5. Save the output in a CSV named wer.csv with columns: • Reference , Hypothesis , and WER 

Expected Output: 

• A CSV file named wer.csv saved in the same directory. • Each row shows the WER score for the respective transcription pair. 41490 Graph Builder Agent Prompt 

Prompt Objective: 

Construct a ‘StateGraph‘ from a structured list of task groups while filtering by a valid task set. 

Input Description: 

• structure : A list of lists where each sublist represents a group of task IDs that can be executed in parallel. • valid_tasks : A set of valid task identifiers (as strings). Only these will be included in the final graph. 

Instructions: 

1. Filter the structure to retain only task IDs present in valid_tasks .2. If the resulting structure is empty but valid_tasks is non-empty, use all numeric valid tasks as a fallback. 3. Add each valid task as a node in the graph using node_map , which maps task_id to a tuple: 

(node_name, function, description) .4. Add a dummy start node and connect it to the first group. 5. Connect each group to the next group, allowing fan-in/fan-out connections. 6. Connect the last group to the terminal END node. 

Expected Output: 

• A compiled StateGraph object that respects the dependency structure implied by the group-ings and task validity. • An error is raised if no valid tasks remain after filtering. 41491 Prompt Checker Agent Prompt 

Prompt Objective: 

Analyze a user’s natural language prompt to determine whether the currently selected task IDs are appropriate, and update the task list if any are missing based on defined task descriptions and selection rules. 

Input Description: 

• user_prompt : A natural language prompt provided by the user describing the task they want to perform. • selected_tasks : A comma-separated string of task numbers (e.g., "1,2,5") that have been initially selected for execution. 

Task Descriptions: 

• Contains 24 predefined task definitions, ranging from ASR transcription to WER computation. 

Selection Rules: 

• Uses keyword and semantic rules (e.g., “if prompt mentions ‘Vocab calculation’, include task 5”) to guide inclusion. • Tasks 1 and 15 are linked if language identification is mentioned. • Certain tasks (e.g., 9, 23, 24) trigger the inclusion of dependent tasks (e.g., task 16). 

Instructions to the LLM: 

1. Analyze the user_prompt and determine which tasks are required based on semantic under-standing and rules. 2. Compare the determined tasks with selected_tasks .3. If any tasks are missing, return Status: Missing , with task IDs and an explanation. 4. If all are correct, return Status: Correct and the list of tasks. 5. Format the output as: 

Status: <Correct|Missing> Tasks: <comma-separated task IDs> Explanation: <why tasks were added (if Missing)> 

Execution Loop: 

• Repeats for a maximum of 3 iterations to ensure task completeness. • Dynamically updates task list with each LLM feedback. • Calls select_tasks() if new insights are needed. 

Output: 

• Returns the final list of task IDs as a comma-separated string. 41492