Title: AudioScape-TTA: A Structured Soundscape Benchmark for Fine-Grained Text-to-Audio Evaluation

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2608.04479v1

Published Time: Thu, 06 Aug 2026 00:32:44 GMT

Number of Pages: 21

Markdown Content:
# AudioScape-TTA: A Structured Soundscape Benchmark for Fine-Grained Text-to-Audio Evaluation 

# Jinting Wang 1, Yuguang Yang 2, Shengyu Li 1, Yan Rong 1,Shan Yang 2, Xiaoda Yang 3, Li Liu 1

> 1

The Hong Kong University of Science and Technology (Guangzhou) 

> 2

Tencent 

> 3

Zhejiang University 

Abstract 

Text-to-audio (TTA) generation has recently achieved remark-able progress in synthesizing realistic audio from natural lan-guage descriptions. However, determining whether generated audio faithfully satisfies complex textual instructions remains challenging. Existing benchmarks mainly rely on global sim-ilarity metrics, providing limited insight into fine-grained semantic failures. To address this limitation, we introduce 

AudioScape-TTA , a structured and complexity-aware bench-mark for fine-grained TTA evaluation. AudioScape-TTA rep-resents realistic soundscapes through modality-aware seman-tic structures and characterizes generation complexity using event density and structural complexity. Based on these an-notations, we propose a rubric-based audio-grounded evalu-ation framework that verifies event realization, acoustic at-tributes, and speech content through fine-grained semantic criteria. The benchmark contains 2,258 audio-text pairs with 25,707 binary QA rubrics, enabling scalable and interpretable analysis of TTA systems. Experiments on 13 representative open-source TTA models reveal persistent limitations in fine-grained attribute control, speech-content preservation, and compositional soundscape generation. Human validation fur-ther demonstrates that our rubric-based evaluation achieves stronger alignment with human semantic judgments than con-ventional global similarity metrics. 

# Introduction 

Recent advances in text-to-audio (TTA) generation have en-abled models to synthesize diverse audio components, in-cluding sound effects, music, and speech, from textual in-structions (Vyas et al. 2023; Yang et al. 2023). With im-proved generation quality and controllability, TTA systems are increasingly expected to handle complex instructions that describe multiple interacting audio components rather than isolated sound events. Therefore, the evaluation challenge is shifting from measuring general audio plausibility toward determining whether models can faithfully realize realistic 

structured soundscapes .However, existing TTA benchmarks provide limited sup-port for evaluating structured soundscape generation. First, existing benchmarks do not consistently provide realistic and compositional instructions that explicitly represent heteroge-neous audio components within a single scene. As summa-rized in Table 1, prior studies investigate caption-level gen-eration, conditional generation, temporal control, and event-level relations (Kim et al. 2019; Drossos, Lipping, and Vir-tanen 2020; Xie et al. 2025; He et al. 2025; Wang et al. 2026, 2025a). However, their prompts are largely centered on coarse-grained sound events, offering limited support for jointly specifying sound effects, background music, and speech within a unified soundscape. In particular, speech is often treated as an audio event rather than a linguistic modal-ity with target utterance constraints, limiting the evaluation of speech-content preservation in complex soundscapes. Second, existing benchmarks provide limited complexity-aware analysis of structured soundscape generation. Al-though recent studies consider multi-event prompts and event-level relations, evaluation is typically summarized as aggregate performance. Such evaluation does not character-ize sample-level complexity, which may vary with acoustic content, active audio categories, and their clip-level com-position. Consequently, existing benchmarks provide limited insight into how semantic instruction following varies as soundscape complexity increases. Beyond benchmark construction, reliable automatic evalu-ation remains challenging. Existing metrics primarily rely on global text–audio similarity, such as CLAP (Wu et al. 2023), or holistic judgments from powerful audio-language models. While these approaches provide useful overall assessments, they typically do not explicitly verify whether individual se-mantic requirements in structured soundscape instructions are satisfied. Consequently, generated audio may receive fa-vorable global scores while still missing specific compo-nents. This motivates a fine-grained evaluation system that provides interpretable diagnoses of semantic failures. To address these limitations, we introduce AudioScape-TTA , a structured and complexity-aware benchmark for fine-grained TTA evaluation. AudioScape-TTA contains 2,258 instances and 25,707 semantic rubrics. Each sample is anno-tated as a structured soundscape comprising scene context, sound effects, background music, and speech components, together with fine-grained semantic rubrics for semantic ver-ification. We characterize sample complexity through two complementary dimensions: event density , which measures the amount of acoustic content in a clip, and structural com-plexity , which characterizes the diversity and clip-level com-position of active audio categories. This design enables anal-ysis of model robustness across soundscapes with different levels of acoustic density and compositional complexity. arXiv:2608.04479v1 [cs.SD] 5 Aug 2026 0 20 40 60 80 100      

> Satisfaction rate (%)
> AudioLDM 2 Make-An-Audio 2 MMAudio Tango 2 TangoFlux EzAudio MAGNet AudioGen Stable Audio Open Foley-Omni Omni2Sound AudioStory Dasheng AudioGen
> (a) Semantic Ability
> Sound Music Speech
> 020 40 60 80 100
> Satisfaction rate (%)
> (b) Complexity Generalization
> Easy Medium Hard

Figure 1: Comprehensive evaluation of open-source TTA generation models on the AudioScape-TTA benchmark. (a) Semantic ability evaluation across three audio modalities, including sound, music, and speech generation. Speech satisfaction rate includes both speaker-related attributes and content correctness. (b) Complexity generalization performance under different generation complexity levels, including easy, medium, and hard subsets. The ⋆⋆ symbol denotes the best-performing model for each metric. Building upon this benchmark, we propose an audio-grounded rubrics-based evaluation framework that decom-poses each structured soundscape instruction into fine-grained semantic requirements covering event presence, acoustic attributes, and speech content. The framework eval-uates these requirements through audio-language under-standing and transcription-based verification, providing in-terpretable diagnostics beyond global text–audio similarity metrics. It further supports fine-grained analysis across audio modalities, soundscape compositions, and complexity levels. We evaluate 13 open-source TTA models spanning diverse generation paradigms. Results show that global similarity and perceptual-quality metrics provide complementary but incomplete indications of fine-grained semantic following ability. Complexity-aware analysis reveals robustness differ-ences across soundscapes with varying complexity. At the model level, the proposed rubrics-based evaluation achieves stronger correlation with human semantic judgments than CLAP-based similarity, demonstrating the effectiveness of structured semantic assessment. Our contributions are summarized as follows: 

• We introduce AudioScape-TTA , a structured and complexity-aware benchmark that represents realistic au-dio scenes as structured soundscapes and enables fine-grained evaluation across different complexity. 

• We propose a rubric-based audio-grounded evaluation that decomposes semantic fidelity into event presence, acoustic attributes, and speech content, enabling scalable and interpretable evaluation. 

• We conduct a comprehensive evaluation of 13 open-source TTA models, revealing key limitations in fine-grained semantic instruction following. 

# Related Work 

Text-to-Audio Generation 

Text-to-audio (TTA) generation aims to synthesize realistic audio from natural-language descriptions. Early approaches, such as AudioGen (Kreuk et al. 2022), formulate TTA as au-toregressive generation over discrete audio tokens, demon-strating the feasibility of large-scale audio synthesis. Recent progress has been largely driven by diffusion-based mod-els. AudioLDM (Liu et al. 2023) introduces latent diffu-sion for audio generation, while subsequent approaches, in-cluding Make-An-Audio (Huang et al. 2023b), Make-An-Audio 2 (Huang et al. 2023a), Auffusion (Xue et al. 2024), and EZAudio (Hai et al. 2025), further improve semantic alignment, temporal modeling, and generation efficiency. More recently, flow-based methods such as TangoFlux (Hung et al. 2024) and MeanAudio (Li et al. 2026b) achieve faster generation with competitive quality. In addition, unified au-dio generation frameworks, including Foley-Omni (Tao et al. 2026), Omni2Sound (Dai et al. 2026), and AudioStory (Guo et al. 2026), extend TTA toward multimodal audio synthesis. Despite recent progress, TTA evaluation remains domi-nated by perceptual quality and global text–audio alignment Benchmark Samples Structured Schema Speech Content Semantic Diagnosis Complexity Aware                                                        

> AudioCaps 1.0 (Kim et al. 2019) 975 ××××
> AudioCaps 2.0 (Kim et al. 2019) 1,778 ××××
> Clotho (Drossos, Lipping, and Virtanen 2020) 1,045 ××××
> AudioCondition (Guo et al. 2024) 1,110 △×△×
> AudioTime (Xie et al. 2025) 500 △×△△
> RiTTA (He et al. 2025) 720 △×△△
> AudioAtlas (Wang et al. 2025a) 1,165 △×△×
> VinTAGe-Bench (Kushwaha and Tian 2025) 636 △×△×
> TTA-Bench (Wang et al. 2026) 2,999 △×△△
> T2A-EpicBench (Wang et al. 2025b) 100 ××△×
> AudioScape-TTA (Ours) 2,258 ✓✓✓✓

Table 1: Comparison of existing TTA benchmarks. Structured Schema indicates whether audio scenes are represented using predefined components (e.g., sound effects, background music, and speech) rather than only free-form captions. Speech Content 

indicates whether synthesized speech is evaluated against annotated linguistic targets, such as transcripts or specified utterances. 

Semantic Diagnosis indicates whether benchmarks provide annotation-grounded criteria for diagnosing specific semantic requirements. ✓ denotes full support, while △ denotes partial support, such as event-level, segment-level, or attribute-level evaluation without a unified semantic rubric. Complexity Aware indicates whether evaluation explicitly characterizes sample complexity or analyzes performance across different complexity levels. metrics, while fine-grained semantic requirement satisfac-tion in structured soundscapes is largely unexplored. 

Benchmarks and Evaluation of TTA Generation. 

Existing TTA benchmarks evaluate generation capabilities from different perspectives. Early datasets such as Audio-Caps (Kim et al. 2019) and Clotho (Drossos, Lipping, and Virtanen 2020) provide large-scale audio-caption pairs and mainly assess global audio–text semantic alignment. How-ever, their free-form captions do not explicitly represent structured soundscape compositions or separate heteroge-neous audio components. Recent benchmarks investigate more specific generation capabilities. AudioCondition (Guo et al. 2024) explores condition-oriented audio generation, while AudioTime (Xie et al. 2025) and RiTTA (He et al. 2025) focus on temporal control and event-level relational reasoning. TTA-Bench (Wang et al. 2026) provides a broader evaluation suite covering diverse prompt categories. Au-dioAtlas (Wang et al. 2025a) and VinTAGe-Bench (Kush-waha and Tian 2025) further extend evaluation toward re-alistic movie- and video-oriented audio scenarios. Recent work has also investigated automatic evaluation of TTA sys-tems through learned evaluation metrics, preference-based benchmarks, and rubric-based evaluators, such as AQAS-core (Kuan, Chang, and Lee 2026), T2A-EpicBench (Wang et al. 2025b), and AnyAudio-Judge (Li et al. 2026a). These approaches primarily focus on improving evaluation mod-els or measuring overall instruction-following performance, rather than establishing a standardized benchmark with struc-tured semantic annotations. In contrast, AudioScape-TTA fo-cuses on benchmark construction. It introduces a structured soundscape, derives standardized audio-grounded semantic rubrics from hierarchical annotations, and provides a unified, complexity-aware evaluation protocol for the reproducible assessment of compositional text-to-audio generation. 

# AudioScape-TTA 

Overview 

AudioScape-TTA is a structured benchmark and evaluation system designed to assess whether generated audio faith-fully satisfies complex textual instructions. Instead of relying only on global text–audio correspondence, AudioScape-TTA represents realistic soundscapes through structured audio components and enables fine-grained semantic evaluation through requirement-level verification. As illustrated in Figure 2, AudioScape-TTA consists of two main components: (1) a structured soundscape bench-mark that organizes audio scenes into explicit audio com-ponents and characterizes sample complexity through event density and structural complexity; and (2) an audio-grounded rubrics-based evaluation system that converts structured soundscape descriptions into fine-grained semantic rubrics for assessing generated audio. Together, these components enable interpretable analysis of TTA systems beyond global text–audio similarity metrics. 

Structured Soundscape Benchmark 

Existing TTA benchmarks mainly provide caption-level de-scriptions, which are insufficient for analyzing realistic soundscapes containing multiple interacting audio compo-nents. To address this limitation, AudioScape-TTA intro-duces a structured representation that organizes audio scenes according to their semantic composition, including environ-mental context, background music, sound effects, and speech. 

Data Collection and Annotation. AudioScape-TTA is con-structed from real-world audio scenes extracted from movie and television productions. We first segment the original audio tracks into short clips and perform keyword-based re-trieval to identify candidate samples covering diverse acous-tic events and soundscape compositions. Complexity Distribution 

## Annotation  

> Raw
> Video
> Audio
> Extraction
> Keyword
> Filter
> Audio
> Clips Initial
> Drafts
> Structured
> Annotation
> Human
> Refinement
> Structured Analysis

Evaluation  

> QA
> Rubrics
> Audio -grounded
> Evaluation Scores

## AudioScape -TTA 

> Structure VS. Density

Figure 2: Overview of AudioScape-TTA , a complexity-aware benchmark for text-driven omni-audio generation. The top panel illustrates the benchmark construction and evaluation pipeline. The bottom panel characterizes AudioScape-TTA in a complexity-aware manner by organizing samples within the proposed Density–Structure complexity space. For each candidate clip, we adopt a semi-automatic an-notation pipeline in which an LLM is used to assist the initial drafting of structured descriptions and component annotations. All annotations are subsequently reviewed and refined by trained annotators, who verify semantic correct-ness, revise inaccurate descriptions, refine annotations for scene context, sound effects, background music, and speech, and remove noisy or ambiguous samples to ensure anno-tation quality and consistency. The final benchmark is ob-tained through a three-stage pipeline consisting of candidate retrieval, LLM-assisted annotation, and human quality assur-ance, where human verification serves as the final authority for all benchmark annotations. 

Structured Soundscape Representation. Each sample in AudioScape-TTA is represented as a structured soundscape description consisting of a scene context and modality-specific audio components: 1) Scene : the overall acoustic environment or contextual setting of the audio clip; 2) Back-ground Music (BGM) : musical elements such as instru-ments, style, and mood; 3) Sound Effects (SFX) : individual acoustic events and environmental actions; 4) Speech : spo-ken content and speaker-related information. The scene component provides high-level contextual in-formation for describing realistic audio environments, while SFX, BGM, and speech define the explicit audio compo-nents evaluated in our semantic verification framework. This representation captures the compositional nature of realis-tic soundscapes and enables analysis beyond isolated event generation. Here, composition refers to the clip-level organi-zation and co-occurrence of predefined audio components. This representation focuses on semantic composition among soundscape components rather than explicitly modeling fine-grained temporal ordering or causal interactions among in-dividual events. 

Complexity-aware Characterization. To enable complexity-aware evaluation, AudioScape-TTA character-izes each sample using two complementary dimensions: 

event density and structural complexity . Event density measures the amount of acoustic content in a clip, whereas structural complexity characterizes the diversity and clip-level composition of active audio categories. Together, these two dimensions capture complementary aspects of soundscape complexity, enabling systematic analysis of model robustness from simple scenes to dense and compo-sitionally complex soundscapes. Based on the normalized combination of these two dimensions, we partition samples into three complexity levels: Easy , Medium , and Hard .Figure 2 summarizes the distributions of event density and structural complexity, while the complete definitions of the two measures and the complexity partition strategy are provided in supplementary material. 

Data Statistics. As summarized in Table 3, AudioScape-TTA contains 2,258 audio-text instances with 25,707 fine-grained semantic rubrics. Each audio has an average duration of 9.95 seconds, and each textual annotation contains 32.45 words on average. Each sample includes approximately 4 annotated semantic events, enabling fine-grained evaluation of event realization, attribute fidelity, and speech-related re-quirements. In particular, speech annotations are provided for 358 clips, including target-utterance evaluation and speech-attribute evaluation covering speaker and linguistic charac-teristics. Detailed statistics of modality distribution, event categories, and annotation characteristics are provided in supplementary material. 

Rubric-based Audio-grounded Evaluation 

Given a structured soundscape description, the goal of eval-uation is to determine whether each predefined semantic re-quirement is satisfied by the generated audio. To this end, we propose a rubric-based audio-grounded evaluation frame-work that converts each structured annotation into a fixed set of semantic verification rubrics and evaluates them through audio-language understanding. As illustrated in Figure 2, the framework consists of three stages: (1) structured rubric construction, (2) audio-grounded verification, and (3) hier-archical score aggregation. 

Structured Rubric Construction. Given a structured de-scription, we employ Qwen3.5-27B (Qwen Team 2026) to extract a hierarchical semantic representation: Sample → Modality → Event → Attribute .

Based on this hierarchy, we construct a fixed set of bi-nary semantic rubrics during benchmark construction. Each rubric defines a fixed semantic verification criterion and is shared across all evaluated models, ensuring consistent and auditable comparison: (1) Event Presence , which verifies whether a required sound event is generated; (2) Event At-tribute , which verifies whether the generated event satisfies the specified acoustic properties; (3) Speech Content , which verifies whether synthesized speech preserves the intended linguistic content. 

Audio-grounded Verification. Each semantic rubric is eval-uated using a verifier according to its semantic type. Event-presence and event-attribute rubrics are verified by Qwen3-Omni-Instruct (Xu et al. 2025), while speech-content rubrics are evaluated by Qwen3-ASR (Shi et al. 2026) through tran-script matching with the annotated target utterance. 

Hierarchical Score Aggregation. Each fixed semantic rubric is independently verified and contributes equally to the final benchmark score, which is computed as the micro-average satisfaction rate over all rubrics. Beyond the overall score, AudioScape-TTA provides hierarchical eval-uation from three complementary perspectives. Rubrics-based evaluation measures semantic instruction following across event presence, event attributes, and speech content. 

Modality-level evaluation analyzes performance on sound effects, background music, and speech. Complexity-aware evaluation further assesses model robustness across Easy, Medium, and Hard soundscapes characterized by different levels of event density and structural complexity. Together, these analyses provide interpretable diagnosis of semantic in-struction following beyond a single aggregate score. Detailed metric definitions are provided in supplementary material. 

# Experiments 

Experimental Setup 

Evaluated Models. We evaluate 13 open-source TTA models on AudioScape-TTA, covering diverse generation paradigms. The evaluated models include AudioLDM2 (Liu et al. 2023), Make-An-Audio 2 (Huang et al. 2023a), MMAu-dio (Cheng et al. 2025), Tango 2 (Majumder et al. 2024), Tan-goFlux (Hung et al. 2024), EzAudio (Hai et al. 2025), MAG-NeT (Ziv et al. 2024), AudioGen (Kreuk et al. 2022), Sta-ble Audio Open (Evans et al. 2025), Foley-Omni (Tao et al. 2026), Omni2Sound (Dai et al. 2026), AudioStory (Guo et al. 2026), and Dasheng AudioGen (Mei et al. 2026). Detailed model architectures and generation paradigms are summa-rized in Table 7 in the supplementary material. 

Evaluation Protocol. We evaluate generated audio from two complementary perspectives: fine-grained requirement satis-faction and global generation quality. For fine-grained eval-uation, we report requirement satisfaction rates over overall, modality-specific, complexity-level, and QA-type subsets. Event-presence and event-attribute requirements are eval-uated by Qwen3-Omni-Instruct (Xu et al. 2025) using bi-nary verification QA, where each rubric checks whether a specified target requirement is realized in the generated au-dio. Speech-content requirements are evaluated by Qwen3-ASR (Shi et al. 2026) based on transcript matching. Since all semantic rubrics in the benchmark are formu-lated as positive requirements, the resulting score measures the proportion of requested requirements successfully sat-isfied by the generated audio rather than general semantic satisfaction rate or hallucination-free generation. Accord-ingly, we denote a metric as Satisfaction Rate (SR). For speech-content requirements, we introduce Speech Content Coverage Satisfaction Rate at threshold 0.60 (SCCA@0.60) to convert transcript matching into binary requirement satis-faction. Word Error Rate (WER) and Character Error Rate (CER) are further reported in the supplementary material as complementary transcription fidelity diagnostics, but are not used for the primary semantic evaluation because many TTA systems do not explicitly generate speech content, resulting in degenerate ASR-based scores. For global audio quality assessment, we include Audiobox-Aesthetic metrics, including Content Enjoyment (CE), Content Usefulness (CU), Production Complexity (PC), and Production Quality (PQ) (Tjandra et al. 2025); Text-audio alignment score ( CLAP MS ) (Elizalde, Desh-mukh, and Wang 2024); and distribution-based metrics in-cluding Fréchet Audio Distance (FAD), Kullback–Leibler (KL) divergence, and Inception Score (ISC). Detailed met-ric definitions and implementation details are provided in supplementary material. 

Fine-grained Semantic Evaluation 

Overall Results. Table 2 summarizes the fine-grained se-mantic evaluation results. Among all evaluated models, Foley-Omni achieves the best overall performance, obtain-ing 79.62% SR and ranking first on both event-presence (81.74%) and event-attribute (78.34%) evaluation. Two ob-servations are noteworthy. First, event-attribute satisfaction rate consistently lags behind event-presence satisfaction rate, indicating that accurately generating a target event is substan-tially easier than faithfully controlling its acoustic attributes. Second, speech-content generation remains a major chal-lenge. Except for Foley-Omni and Dasheng AudioGen, all Model Year Params Overall Event Presence Event Attribute Speech Content Text-Audio SR (%) ↑ Conf. SR (%) ↑ Conf. SR (%) ↑ Conf. SCCA@0.60 ↑ CLAP MS ↑

AudioLDM 2 2023 1.5B 66.92 93.85 68.43 94.05 66.57 93.71 0.00 0.4193 Make-An-Audio 2 2023 937M 61.33 92.99 61.48 93.26 61.89 92.80 0.00 0.3321 AudioGen 2023 1.5B 66.53 93.62 68.40 93.99 65.92 93.35 0.00 0.3664 Tango 2 2024 866M 76.82 93.33 80.84 93.97 74.78 92.88 0.00 0.4145 TangoFlux 2024 515M 76.77 94.27 80.55 94.56 74.89 94.07 0.00 0.4736 EzAudio 2025 875M 78.20 94.14 80.83 94.38 77.17 93.97 0.00 0.4713 MAGNeT 2024 1.5B 53.39 92.44 49.89 92.38 56.50 92.48 0.00 0.2827 Stable Audio Open 2025 1.1B 65.95 93.59 67.57 93.98 65.51 93.32 0.00 0.3480 MMAudio 2025 1.03B 64.73 94.15 67.80 94.52 63.24 93.89 0.00 0.5169 

Foley-Omni 2026 5.5B 79.62 94.05 81.74 94.66 78.34 93.61 57.06 0.4378 Omni2Sound 2026 1.33B 77.59 94.47 79.98 94.86 76.72 94.20 0.00 0.4370 AudioStory 2026 4.36B 69.03 93.04 70.09 93.36 69.02 92.80 0.00 0.3989 Dasheng AudioGen 2026 2.19B 74.50 94.17 74.86 94.27 74.21 94.09 77.30 0.4139 

Table 2: Fine-grained semantic evaluation results on AudioScape-TTA. Best and second-best results are highlighted in bold and underline, respectively. 

Statistics Number 

Total Samples 2,258 Total Semantic Rubrics 25,707 Avg. Audio Duration 9.95 sec Avg. Annotation Length 32.45 words Avg. Semantic Rubrics 11.39 Avg. Events 4

Speech-related Statistics 

Speech-annotated Clips 358 (15.85%) Clips with Target Utterances 83 Speech-content Rubrics 163 Speech-attribute Rubrics 931 

Table 3: Key statistics of the AudioScape-TTA benchmark. evaluated models achieve 0% SCCA, revealing that current open-source TTA systems largely fail to preserve linguistic content despite producing speech-like audio. 

Modality-specific Analysis. Figure 1 (a) reveals clear modality-specific differences among current TTA systems. Foley-Omni achieves the strongest performance on sound effects, while EzAudio performs best on music. Speech is considerably more challenging than the other modalities, with Dasheng AudioGen being the only model achieving competitive speech-content satisfaction rate. Performance further degrades on multi-modal compositions that jointly involve sound effects, music, and speech (Table 9 in the sup-plementary material), suggesting that modeling interactions among audio components remains a key challenge for current TTA systems. Foley-Omni and Dasheng AudioGen show the strongest robustness under these compositional settings. 

Complexity-aware Analysis. Figure 1 (b) shows that the semantic satisfaction rate consistently degrades as complex-ity increases. While several models perform competitively on easy subsets, their performance drops substantially on medium and hard subsets. Foley-Omni exhibits strong ro-bustness, particularly on the hard subset, indicating superior 1 2 3 4 5  

> Mean Score (MOS) AudioLDM 2 Make-An-Audio 2 AudioGen Tango 2 TangoFlux EzAudio MAGNeT Stable Audio Open MMAudio Foley-Omni Omni2Sound AudioStory Dasheng AudioGen
> Event Completeness Attribute Satisfaction Audio Quality

Figure 3: User study results on the AudioScape-TTA bench-mark. Markers indicate mean human ratings for event com-pleteness, attribute satisfaction rate, and audio quality, while error bars denote standard deviations. semantic grounding under dense compositional soundscapes. 

Comparison with Conventional Evaluation Metrics 

Table 2 additionally reports CLAP MS as a conventional global text–audio alignment metric for comparison. The ranking under CLAP-based similarity is not consistent with fine-grained rubrics-based semantic satisfaction. For ex-ample, MMAudio achieves the highest CLAP MS score (0.5169) but obtains only 64.73% semantic requirement sat-isfaction rate, indicating that strong global text–audio align-ment does not necessarily guarantee faithful realization of individual semantic requirements. In contrast, Foley-Omni achieves the highest semantic satisfaction rate while rank-ing lower under CLAP-based alignment. These results sug-gest that global embedding-based metrics and rubrics-based evaluation capture complementary aspects of TTA gener-ation: CLAP measures overall text–audio correspondence, whereas rubrics-based evaluation directly verifies whether individual prompt-specified requirements are satisfied. We further report perceptual quality and distribution-based metrics, including Audiobox-Aesthetic scores, FAD, KL divergence, and ISC, in the supplementary material. 

User Study 

To obtain human judgments for validating metric reliability, we conduct a user study on AudioScape-TTA. We randomly select 10 prompts covering diverse modality compositions and complexity levels, and collect generated audio from all 13 evaluated models, resulting in 130 samples. Each sam-ple is rated by 26 participants on three dimensions: event completeness , attribute satisfaction rate , and audio quality .Event completeness measures whether required events are generated, attribute satisfaction rate evaluates whether fine-grained acoustic properties are preserved, and audio quality assesses perceptual naturalness and generation artifacts. Par-ticipants rate each dimension using a 5-point Likert scale. As shown in Figure 3, human judgments closely agree with the fine-grained QA evaluation. Foley-Omni achieves the highest scores in event completeness and attribute satis-faction rate, consistent with its leading semantic following performance. Dasheng AudioGen obtains the highest audio quality score, indicating stronger perceptual quality among the evaluated models. 

Human Alignment of Evaluation Metrics 

We quantify the agreement between human judgments and automatic metrics using model-level Spearman correlation across the 13 evaluated TTA models. Human evaluation pro-vides ratings for event completeness, attribute satisfaction, and audio quality. To summarize semantic instruction fol-lowing into a single target, we define a composite human semantic score (Semantic †) as the equal-weight average of event completeness and attribute satisfaction. Audio quality is excluded because it measures perceptual preference rather than semantic correctness. Table 4 shows that the our rubric-based metrics achieve strong alignment with corresponding human judgments. Event SR exhibits a strong correlation with human event-completeness ratings, while Attribute SR closely matches human attribute-satisfaction ratings. The aggregated Overall SR achieves the highest correlation with the composite hu-man semantic score, substantially outperforming CLAP MS ,which measures global text–audio similarity. These results demonstrate that rubric-based evaluation better captures human-perceived semantic instruction following than global embedding-based similarity metrics in our evaluation setting. 

Discussion 

Our analysis reveals several key challenges in current text-to-audio generation. First, semantic event recognition and fine-grained acoustic control remain fundamentally different ca-pabilities. While current models can often generate the target sound events, reproducing the associated attributes and de-tailed acoustic characteristics remains challenging, suggest-ing that future TTA models require stronger compositional               

> Human Judgment Metric ρpHolm
> Completeness Event SR 0.743 0.0072 Attribute Attribute SR 0.825 0.0003 Semantic †Overall SR 0.879 0.0015
> CLAP MS 0.312 0.0739

Table 4: Model-level Spearman correlations between auto-matic evaluation metrics and human judgments across 13 TTA models using the same samples as the user study. All two-sided p values are Holm-adjusted over the four correla-tion tests. Bold indicates the highest correlation coefficient. Semantic † denotes the equal-weight average of event com-pleteness and attribute satisfaction. and attribute-aware generation mechanisms. Second, speech generation remains a distinct challenge compared with other audio modalities. Preserving linguistic content, speaker iden-tity, and acoustic realism simultaneously requires modeling multiple aspects of speech, which is not yet reliably achieved by unified TTA systems. Third, current models struggle with highly compositional soundscapes involving multiple events and interacting modalities. The degradation under increasing complexity suggests that existing systems are still primarily optimized for individual sound generation rather than struc-tured audio scene composition. Finally, our human correla-tion analysis highlights the importance of fine-grained evalu-ation for future TTA research. Global metrics remain useful for assessing perceptual quality and coarse similarity, but they provide limited insight into specific semantic failures. Structured evaluation enables more interpretable diagnosis of model capabilities and facilitates future progress toward controllable audio generation. 

# Conclusion 

In this work, we introduced AudioScape-TTA , a structured and complexity-aware benchmark and evaluation frame-work for fine-grained text-to-audio generation. By repre-senting soundscapes through modality-aware semantic struc-tures and evaluating generation results through rubric-based verification, AudioScape-TTA enables interpretable analy-sis beyond conventional global similarity metrics. Extensive experiments on 13 open-source TTA models reveal persis-tent limitations in fine-grained attribute realization, speech-content preservation, and compositional soundscape gener-ation. Human validation further demonstrates that our eval-uation framework aligns well with human semantic judg-ments, highlighting the importance of requirement-level evaluation for assessing TTA instruction following. We hope AudioScape-TTA can facilitate the development of more con-trollable and semantically faithful audio generation systems. Future extensions may explore richer soundscape represen-tations with temporal, spatial, and causal relations, as well as more advanced evaluation protocols for complex audio interactions and long-form generation scenarios. References 

Cheng, H. K.; Ishii, M.; Hayakawa, A.; Shibuya, T.; Schwing, A.; and Mitsufuji, Y. 2025. Mmaudio: Taming multimodal joint training for high-quality video-to-audio synthesis. In 

Proceedings of the Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition Conference , 28901–28911. Dai, Y.; Chen, Z.; Jiang, Y.; Ke, Q.; Cai, J.; and Zhu, J. 2026. Omni2sound: Towards unified video-text-to-audio genera-tion. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Com-puter Vision and Pattern Recognition , 1661–1671. Drossos, K.; Lipping, S.; and Virtanen, T. 2020. Clotho: An audio captioning dataset. In ICASSP 2020-2020 IEEE International Conference on Acoustics, Speech and Signal Processing (ICASSP) , 736–740. IEEE. Elizalde, B.; Deshmukh, S.; and Wang, H. 2024. Natural language supervision for general-purpose audio representa-tions. In ICASSP 2024-2024 IEEE International Conference on Acoustics, Speech and Signal Processing (ICASSP) , 336– 340. IEEE. Evans, Z.; Parker, J. D.; Carr, C.; Zukowski, Z.; Taylor, J.; and Pons, J. 2025. Stable audio open. In ICASSP 2025-2025 IEEE International Conference on Acoustics, Speech and Signal Processing (ICASSP) , 1–5. IEEE. Guo, Y.; Wang, T.; Ge, Y.; Ma, S.; Ge, Y.; and Zou, W. 2026. Audiostory: Generating long-form narrative audio with large language models. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Confer-ence on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition , 37735– 37744. Guo, Z.; Mao, J.; Tao, R.; Yan, L.; Ouchi, K.; Liu, H.; and Wang, X. 2024. Audio generation with multiple conditional diffusion model. In Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence , volume 38, 18153–18161. Hai, J.; Xu, Y.; Zhang, H.; Li, C.; Wang, H.; Elhilali, M.; and Yu, D. 2025. EzAudio: Enhancing Text-to-Audio Generation with Efficient Diffusion Transformer. In Proc. Interspeech 2025 , 4233–4237. He, Y.; Jain, Y.; Liu, X.; Markham, A.; and Vineet, V. 2025. RiTTA: Modeling Event Relations in Text-to-Audio Gener-ation. In Proceedings of the 2025 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing , 3497–3511. Huang, J.; Ren, Y.; Huang, R.; Yang, D.; Ye, Z.; Zhang, C.; Liu, J.; Yin, X.; Ma, Z.; and Zhao, Z. 2023a. Make-an-audio 2: Temporal-enhanced text-to-audio generation. arXiv preprint arXiv:2305.18474 .Huang, R.; Huang, J.; Yang, D.; Ren, Y.; Liu, L.; Li, M.; Ye, Z.; Liu, J.; Yin, X.; and Zhao, Z. 2023b. Make-an-audio: Text-to-audio generation with prompt-enhanced diffu-sion models. In International Conference on Machine Learn-ing , 13916–13932. PMLR. Hung, C.-Y.; Majumder, N.; Kong, Z.; Mehrish, A.; Bagherzadeh, A. A.; Li, C.; Valle, R.; Catanzaro, B.; and Poria, S. 2024. Tangoflux: Super fast and faithful text to audio generation with flow matching and clap-ranked pref-erence optimization. arXiv preprint arXiv:2412.21037 .Kim, C. D.; Kim, B.; Lee, H.; and Kim, G. 2019. Audiocaps: Generating captions for audios in the wild. In Proceed-ings of the 2019 Conference of the North American Chapter of the Association for Computational Linguistics: Human Language Technologies, Volume 1 (Long and Short Papers) ,119–132. Kreuk, F.; Synnaeve, G.; Polyak, A.; Singer, U.; Défossez, A.; Copet, J.; Parikh, D.; Taigman, Y.; and Adi, Y. 2022. Audiogen: Textually guided audio generation. arXiv preprint arXiv:2209.15352 .Kuan, C.-Y.; Chang, K.-W.; and Lee, H.-y. 2026. AQAS-core: Evaluating Semantic Alignment in Text-to-Audio Gen-eration via Audio Question Answering. arXiv preprint arXiv:2601.14728 .Kushwaha, S. S.; and Tian, Y. 2025. Vintage: Joint video and text conditioning for holistic audio generation. In Pro-ceedings of the Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition Conference , 13529–13539. Li, H.; Tan, T.; Yang, Y.; Yang, S.; and Chen, X. 2026a. AnyAudio-Judge: A Dynamic Rubric-Based Benchmark and Evaluator for Audio Instruction Following. arXiv preprint arXiv:2606.03116 .Li, X.; Liu, J.; Liang, Y.; Niu, Z.; Chen, W.; and Chen, X. 2026b. Meanaudio: Fast and faithful text-to-audio generation with mean flows. In Proceedings of the 64th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics (Volume 1: Long Papers) , 14378–14393. Liu, H.; Chen, Z.; Yuan, Y.; Mei, X.; Liu, X.; Mandic, D.; Wang, W.; and Plumbley, M. D. 2023. AudioLDM: Text-to-Audio Generation with Latent Diffusion Models. In Inter-national Conference on Machine Learning , 21450–21474. PMLR. Majumder, N.; Hung, C.-Y.; Ghosal, D.; Hsu, W.-N.; Mihal-cea, R.; and Poria, S. 2024. Tango 2: Aligning diffusion-based text-to-audio generative models through direct prefer-ence optimization. In ACM Multimedia 2024 .Mei, J.; Dinkel, H.; Niu, Y.; Sun, X.; Li, G.; Liao, Y.; Zhou, J.; Zhang, J.; Luan, J.; and Wu, M. 2026. Dasheng AudioGen: A Unified Model for Generating Coherent Audio Scenes from Text. arXiv preprint arXiv:2605.27838 .Qwen Team. 2026. Qwen3.5: Towards Native Multimodal Agents. Shi, X.; Wang, X.; Guo, Z.; Wang, Y.; Zhang, P.; Zhang, X.; Guo, Z.; Hao, H.; Xi, Y.; Yang, B.; et al. 2026. Qwen3-ASR Technical Report. arXiv preprint arXiv:2601.21337 .Tao, Y.; Liu, L.; Xu, X.; Feng, J.; Wang, J.; Qin, Y.; Mao, S.; Liu, W.; and Wang, S. 2026. Foley-Omni: A Unified Multi-modal Generation Model from Task-Level Audio Synthesis to Complete Video Soundtrack Generation. arXiv preprint arXiv:2606.03672 .Tjandra, A.; Wu, Y.-C.; Guo, B.; Hoffman, J.; Ellis, B.; Vyas, A.; Shi, B.; Chen, S.; Le, M.; Zacharov, N.; et al. 2025. Meta audiobox aesthetics: Unified automatic assess-ment for speech, music and sound. In 2025 IEEE Automatic Speech Recognition and Understanding Workshop (ASRU) ,1–8. IEEE. Vyas, A.; Shi, B.; Le, M.; Tjandra, A.; Wu, Y.-C.; Guo, B.; Zhang, J.; Zhang, X.; Adkins, R.; Ngan, W.; et al. 2023. Audiobox: Unified audio generation with natural language prompts. arXiv preprint arXiv:2312.15821 .Wang, C.; Dai, Y.; Sun, L.; Du, J.; and Gao, J. 2025a. Au-dioAtlas: A Comprehensive and Balanced Benchmark To-wards Movie-Oriented Text-to-Audio Generation. In Pro-ceedings of the 33rd ACM International Conference on Mul-timedia , 13266–13272. Wang, H.; Liu, C.; Chen, J.; Liu, H.; Jia, Y.; Zhao, S.; Zhou, J.; Sun, H.; Bu, H.; and Qin, Y. 2026. Tta-bench: A com-prehensive benchmark for evaluating text-to-audio models. In Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelli-gence , volume 40, 33512–33520. Wang, Z.; Lei, K.; Zhu, C.; Huang, J.; Zhou, S.; Liu, L.; Cheng, X.; Ji, S.; Ye, Z.; Jin, T.; et al. 2025b. T2A-Feedback: Improving Basic Capabilities of Text-to-Audio Generation via Fine-grained AI Feedback. In Proceedings of the 63rd Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Lin-guistics (Volume 1: Long Papers) , 23535–23547. Wu, Y.; Chen, K.; Zhang, T.; Hui, Y.; Berg-Kirkpatrick, T.; and Dubnov, S. 2023. Large-scale contrastive language-audio pretraining with feature fusion and keyword-to-caption augmentation. In ICASSP 2023-2023 IEEE International Conference on Acoustics, Speech and Signal Processing (ICASSP) , 1–5. IEEE. Xie, Z.; Xu, X.; Wu, Z.; and Wu, M. 2025. Audiotime: A temporally-aligned audio-text benchmark dataset. In ICASSP 2025-2025 IEEE International Conference on Acoustics, Speech and Signal Processing (ICASSP) , 1–5. IEEE. Xu, J.; Guo, Z.; Hu, H.; Chu, Y.; Wang, X.; He, J.; Wang, Y.; Shi, X.; He, T.; Zhu, X.; et al. 2025. Qwen3-omni technical report. arXiv preprint arXiv:2509.17765 .Xue, J.; Deng, Y.; Gao, Y.; and Li, Y. 2024. Auffusion: Leveraging the power of diffusion and large language models for text-to-audio generation. IEEE/ACM Transactions on Audio, Speech, and Language Processing , 32: 4700–4712. Yang, D.; Tian, J.; Tan, X.; Huang, R.; Liu, S.; Chang, X.; Shi, J.; Zhao, S.; Bian, J.; Zhao, Z.; et al. 2023. Uniaudio: An audio foundation model toward universal audio generation. 

arXiv preprint arXiv:2310.00704 .Ziv, A.; Gat, I.; Le Lan, G.; Remez, T.; Kreuk, F.; Copet, J.; Défossez, A.; Synnaeve, G.; and Adi, Y. 2024. Masked audio generation using a single non-autoregressive transformer. In 

International Conference on Learning Representations , vol-ume 2024, 43249–43268. Additional Dataset Details 

Annotation Pipeline 

The construction of AudioScape-TTA follows a three-stage annotation pipeline. First, candidate audio clips are retrieved using keyword-based filtering from a large-scale video repository. Second, Gemini-2.5-Pro is used to generate initial descriptions and candidate structured annotations, including modality-level events and attributes. Third, human annotators verify and refine these annotations, correct semantic errors, and remove ambiguous samples. This procedure ensures both annotation scalability and semantic reliability. 

Complexity Score Definition 

We characterize sample complexity using two complemen-tary dimensions: event density and structural complexity .While event density measures the amount of acoustic con-tent contained in a clip, structural complexity characterizes the diversity and clip-level composition of active audio cat-egories. Together, they capture two complementary aspects of generation complexity. 

Event Density. Event density measures how much acoustic content is contained in a soundscape. It is defined as Density = NSFX + NSpeech + NBGM , (1) where NSFX denotes the number of annotated SFX event instances in a clip, with repeated occurrences counted sep-arately. In contrast, NSpeech ∈ { 0, 1} and NBGM ∈ { 0, 1}

are binary indicators denoting the presence of speech and background music, respectively. This asymmetric definition reflects the different temporal characteristics of the three audio categories. SFX typically consists of discrete and countable event instances, whereas speech usually forms a continuous dialogue layer and BGM serves as a sustained background layer. Counting individual speech utterances or music segments would depend heavily on annotation granularity and could artificially inflate the density score. We therefore count SFX at the event-instance level while representing speech and BGM solely by their clip-level presence. Note that density does not represent physical loudness or duration; it only measures the number of anno-tated semantic components. 

Structural Complexity. Structural complexity measures how diverse the composition of a soundscape is, independent of the number of event instances. It is defined as Structure_Score = Smodality + Scooccur , (2) where Smodality denotes the number of active audio cate-gories among Speech , SFX , and BGM . We treat speech as a distinct modality because, unlike non-speech audio compo-nents, speech generation requires not only acoustic realiza-tion but also preservation of linguistic content and speaker-related characteristics. The clip-level co-occurrence term Scooccur ∈ { 0, 1} is defined as 

Scooccur = I [Speech ∧ (SFX ∨ BGM)] , (3) where I[·] is the indicator function. It equals 1 when speech co-occurs with at least one non-speech audio category (SFX or BGM), and 0 otherwise. Therefore, Structure_Score ranges from 0 to 4, where larger values indicate more diverse modality combinations. Unlike event density, structural complexity does not de-pend on the number of SFX instances. Instead, it captures the diversity of active audio categories and whether hetero-geneous audio components must be generated jointly. We ex-plicitly consider speech-related co-occurrence because uni-fied speech-aware audio generation introduces additional re-quirements beyond non-speech sound synthesis, including linguistic content preservation, speaker identity modeling, and coordination between vocal and non-vocal components. Therefore, soundscapes containing speech together with SFX or BGM typically require joint modeling of semantic, acous-tic, and linguistic factors. The proposed structural complexity is designed as a prac-tical benchmark-oriented complexity heuristic rather than a claim that speech is universally more complex than other audio categories. The co-occurrence term character-izes category-level composition only; it does not explicitly model temporal overlap, event ordering, causal relations, or semantic interactions among components. Accordingly, the proposed complexity characterization captures clip-level audio-category composition rather than explicit temporal overlap, event ordering, causal relations, or semantic interac-tions among individual events. References to compositional difficulty in this paper should therefore be interpreted under this benchmark-specific Density–Structure characterization. 

Complexity Score. Since event density and structural com-plexity are measured on different scales, we first normalize them using z-score normalization and then compute the over-all complexity score as 

C = Z(Density ) + Z(Structure_Score ), (4) where Z(·) denotes z-score normalization. Finally, samples are partitioned into three complexity lev-els according to 



Easy , C ≤ − 1,

Medium , −1 < C < 1,

Hard , C ≥ 1.

The thresholds are selected based on standardized complex-ity scores to separate low-, medium-, and high-complexity samples while maintaining sufficient samples in each sub-set. This formulation enables complexity-aware evaluation by jointly considering both the amount of acoustic content and the compositional diversity of structured soundscapes. 

Complementarity Analysis. Across all 2,258 samples, event density and structural complexity exhibit only weak correlation (Pearson r = 0 .221 ; Spearman ρ = 0 .153 ), indi-cating that the two metrics capture complementary aspects of audio-scene complexity. Specifically, event density measures Complexity Annotation Semantic Rubrics 

Easy [Scene] Outdoor water source environment; [SFX] Gentle continuous gurgling and trickling of flowing water; [SFX] Water pouring out of the spout. 

Event presence: 1. Is there an outdoor water source environment? 2. Is there flowing water? 3. Is there water pouring out of the spout? 

Event attributes: 1. Is the sound of flowing water characterized by gurgling and trickling? 2. Is the sound of flowing water gentle and continuous? 

Medium [Scene] Indoor cafe/kitchen environment; [BGM] Slow gentle sentimental piano music; [SFX] Grinding/blending machinery sound; [SFX] Subtle clinks and food prepara-tion sounds; [SFX] Bowl being placed on counter. 

Event presence: 1. Is there an indoor cafe/kitchen environment present? 2. Is there a grinding or blend-ing machinery sound present? 3. Are there subtle clinks and food-preparation sounds? 4. Is there a bowl being placed on counter present? 5. Is there piano music present? 

Event attributes: 1. Is the sound of food preparation characterized by subtle clinks? 2. Is the mood of the piano music slow, gentle, and sentimental? 3. Is the instrument of the slow gentle sentimental music a piano? 

Hard [Scene] Indoor closed environment; [BGM] Tense atmo-spheric dramatic score with ominous synthesized tones; [SFX] Male speaking; Thunder and lightning; Baby cry-ing; [Speaker A, elderly male, hoarse voice]: “Tell the story. He said he could hear that baby cry just as plain...” 

Event presence: 1. Is there an indoor closed en-vironment? 2. Is there a male speaking? 3. Is there thunder and lightning? 4. Is there a baby crying? 5. Are ominous synthesized tones present? 

Speech content: Does the speech include the phrase ’tell the story. He said he could hear that baby cry just as plain. And um...? 

Event attributes: 1. Is the speaker male? 2. Is the speaker elderly? 3. Is the speaker speaking in hoarse voice? 4. Is the source of the crying referred to as a baby? 5. Is the action or content of the crying described as crying? 6. Is the genre of the score described as atmospheric dramatic? 7. Is the mood of the score described as tense? 8. Is the instrument of the score described as synthesized tones? 

Table 5: Examples of structured annotation and semantic rubrics across different complexity levels. 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 

Density Score 

> 0510 15 20 25
> Percentage (%)

(a) Density Distribution    

> 1234

Structure Score 

> 010 20 30 40 50 60 70
> Percentage (%)

(b) Structure Score Distribution    

> 1234

Number of Speakers 

> 010 20 30 40 50 60 70 80
> Percentage (%)
> 68.3% 25.1% 5.7% 0.9%

(c) Distribution of Speakers   

> English Chinese Multi-lingual Others

Language 

> 010 20 30 40 50 60 70 80 90
> Percentage (%)
> 78.0% 14.1% 7.0% 0.9%

(d) Distribution of Speech Languages Figure 4: Statistics of the proposed AudioScape-TTA benchmark. (a) Density distribution reflects the combination of discrete SFX-instance counts and clip-level presence indicators for speech and BGM. (b) Structure score distribution characterizes the complexity and organization of multi-event soundscapes. (c) and (d) summarize speaker number and speech language distributions, highlighting the diversity of speech-related scenarios. These statistics demonstrate the multimodal diversity and compositional complexity of the benchmark. the amount of acoustic content, whereas structural complex-ity characterizes the diversity and co-occurrence patterns of audio components. 

Data Statistics 

To further demonstrate the diversity and complexity of the proposed AudioScape-TTA benchmark, we provide addi-tional annotation examples and dataset statistics in the sup-plementary material. Table 5 presents representative samples with different complexity levels, where each audio scene is described through a hierarchical annotation scheme cover-ing scene context, sound effects (SFX), background music (BGM), speaker attributes, and speech content. The corre-sponding semantic rubrics further decompose these complex descriptions into fine-grained evaluation criteria, enabling detailed assessment of event presence, attributes, and speech semantics. As the complexity increases, samples contain richer modality combinations, more discrete SFX instances, and more complex clip-level audio-category composition, ranging from simple isolated sound sources to challenging scenarios involving simultaneous environmental sounds, mu-sic, and speech. Moreover, Figure 4 summarizes the benchmark statis-tics from multiple perspectives. The density and structure score distributions characterize the complexity of multi-event soundscapes, reflecting the number of co-occurring audio elements and their structural organization. The speaker and language distributions further demonstrate the diversity of speech-related scenarios. Together, these results highlight that AudioScape-TTA covers diverse audio modalities and challenging compositional sound environments, providing a comprehensive testbed for evaluating TTA generation mod-els. Table 6 summarizes the composition of the Easy, Medium, and Hard subsets. As the difficulty level increases, audio scenes become progressively more complex, with more an-notated SFX events, higher proportions of speech and back-ground music, more multimodal compositions, and a larger number of QA rubrics per clip. These statistics confirm that the proposed difficulty partition reflects increasing compo-sitional complexity rather than merely differences in sample count. 

Semantic Rubrics Construction Details 

We construct rubrics pairs from structured event-level anno-tations using a deterministic target-generation pipeline fol-lowed by natural-language rewriting. The semantic target of each rubrics pair is derived directly from the annotation, while the LLM is only used to rewrite the target into a con-cise listener-answerable yes/no question. Therefore, the LLM does not decide the answer or introduce new semantic tar-gets. All rubrics pairs use the same two-choice format, A: Yes and B: No , and the reference answer is set to A because each question is generated from a positive annotated event or attribute. 

Rubrics Types. We generate three types of rubrics pairs: 

• Event presence : verifies whether a non-speech sound event, background music, or acoustic scene is present in the audio. 

• Event attribute : verifies whether a specific event-level acoustic attribute is realized, such as sound source, mate-rial, intensity, temporal pattern, spatial property, instru-ment, emotion, speaker identity, or language. 

• Speech content : verifies whether the spoken content of a speech event is preserved. 

Structured rubrics schema. Each QA rubrics pair stores both the natural-language question and its structured evi-dence:                                     

> 1{
> 2"qa_id": string,
> 3"qa_type": "event_presence |event_attribute |speech_content",
> 4"answer_type": "two_choice",
> 5"question": string,
> 6"choices": {"A": "Yes", "B": "No"},
> 7"answer": "A",
> 8"modality": "SFX |BGM |Speech | Scene",
> 9"event_id": int,
> 10 "event_text": string,
> 11 "attribute_field": string,
> 12 "attribute_value": string,
> 13 "evidence": object
> 14 }

Target generation. For each annotated event, we first con-struct structured QA targets. For non-speech events, we cre-ate an event_presence target. For all events, we select informative attributes according to modality-specific prior-ity lists and create event_attribute targets. Generic or uninformative values are removed. For speech events, if the action_or_content field contains explicit spoken content, we create a speech_content target. The attribute priorities are: 

• Speech : speaker gender, age, role, language, emotion, style, prosody, source. 

• SFX : source, action/content, intensity, spatial property, temporal pattern, material, style. 

• BGM : genre, mood, instrument, style, intensity, temporal pattern, spatial property. 

• Scene : spatial property, temporal pattern, intensity, mood, style. 

Question rewriting. Structured targets are rewritten into natural questions using an LLM with strict constraints. The model is instructed to preserve the qa_id , qa_type , event ID, modality, and attribute field; not to add or remove tar-gets; and not to include answer choices in the question. The prompt also prevents exposing internal annotation terms such as actor_or_source or action_or_content . For 

speech_content , the rewritten question must quote the exact spoken content or a long exact phrase. The core rewriting instruction is:                                      

> 1Rewrite each structured QA target as one natural yes/no question for evaluating agenerated audio clip.
> 2Subset # Samples Avg. SFX Speech (%) BGM (%) Multi-comp. (%) Avg. Rubrics
> Easy 732 2.36 0.00 10.52 0.00 7.62 Medium 1,103 3.91 0.73 25.84 26.38 11.92 Hard 423 4.48 56.03 56.50 85.11 16.51

Table 6: Composition statistics of the Easy, Medium, and Hard subsets. Avg. SFX denotes the mean number of annotated SFX instances per clip. Speech and BGM indicate the percentages of clips containing the corresponding modality. Multi-comp. denotes the percentage of clips containing at least two modalities among Speech, SFX, and BGM. Avg. Rubrics is the average number of QA rubrics per clip in the final released benchmark.                                                     

> 3Requirements:
> 4-Answerable solely from the audio.
> 5-Preserve the original target exactly.
> 6-Do not add or omit information.
> 7-Do not expose internal field names.
> 8-Keep the question concise and natural.
> 910 Return strict JSON:
> 11 {
> 12 "questions": [
> 13 {
> 14 "qa_id": "same id as input",
> 15 "question": "natural yes/no question"
> 16 }
> 17 ]
> 18 }

Leakage prevention and fallback templates. To reduce question leakage, we apply rule-based checks after rewriting. A question is replaced by a safe template if it copies the full event text into an attribute question, repeats the attribute value excessively, exposes internal field names, or contains forbid-den words such as reference , annotation , caption ,or metadata . We use component-aware fallback templates, 

e.g.,                                          

> 1Event presence: Is there asound event described as {event_text}?
> 2BGM genre: Is there {value} background music in the audio?
> 3SFX material: Does the sound have a{value} quality?
> 4Speech language: Is the speech in {value}?
> 5Speech content: Does the speaker say "{spoken_content}" in the audio?

Validation and filtering. Finally, each generated question is validated against its structured evidence. The validation checks whether the question refers to the same event, modal-ity, and attribute, whether the attribute value is correctly rep-resented, and whether unsupported details are introduced. Questions with severe validation errors are discarded. We also remove duplicated questions, questions with internal field wording, invalid Scene event-attribute questions, and malformed questions. After filtering, the final benchmark contains 25,707 rubrics pairs over 2,258 audio-text instances. 

# Detailed Metric Definitions 

This section provides the precise definitions of the fine-grained metrics used in AudioScape-TTA. Unless otherwise stated, all reported values are multiplied by 100 and presented as percentages. 

Semantic Satisfaction Rate. For each event-presence or event-attribute rubric i, let pi ∈ { Yes , No } denote the se-mantic answer predicted by Qwen3-Omni-Instruct and let 

yi = Yes denote the positive target requirement derived from the annotation. Its binary satisfaction indicator is 

si = I[pi = yi].

For a speech-content rubric i, the satisfaction indicator is defined using the ASR-based coverage criterion: 

si = I[Rmixed ,i ≥ 0.60] .

For any rubric set S, the Semantic Satisfaction Rate is the micro-average of item-level indicators: 

SR( S) = 1

|S| 

X

> i∈S

si, (5) 

Overall SR = SR( Q), Event SR = SR( Qevent ),

Attribute SR = SR( Qattr ). (6) 

Evaluator confidence. For event-presence and event-attribute rubrics, we additionally report an uncalibrated evaluator-confidence diagnostic. Let ℓA and ℓB be the log-probabilities assigned to the two answer options. We normal-ize them over the binary choice set: 

qA = exp( ℓA)exp( ℓA) + exp( ℓB ) , qB = exp( ℓB )exp( ℓA) + exp( ℓB ) .

(7) and the reported value is the mean confidence over the cor-responding rubrics subset. This quantity measures the evalu-ator’s relative preference between the two candidate answers only. It is not calibrated as a probability of semantic cor-rectness, is not an audio-quality metric, and should not be compared directly across different evaluator models. 

Speech-content preprocessing. Speech content is evalu-ated by comparing the Qwen3-ASR transcript with the anno-tated target text. Before scoring, we remove a leading brack-eted tag when present, lowercase Latin text, and collapse consecutive whitespace. Punctuation does not form an eval-uation unit. We retain numbers, repeated words, and filler expressions; no stop-word removal, duplicate suppression, or prefix-based shortcut is applied. We extract two unit types from the normalized text: • Word units : lowercased Latin alphanumeric tokens, op-tionally containing internal hyphens or apostrophes; 

• Character units : individual Chinese CJK characters. This mixed-unit formulation supports English, Chinese, and code-switched speech under a single protocol. 

Mixed-unit coverage. Let r and ˆr denote the normalized reference text and ASR transcript, respectively. Let cwr (u) and 

cw 

> ˆr

(u) be the occurrence counts of word unit u in the reference and transcript; ccr (v) and cc 

> ˆr

(v) are defined analogously for Chinese character unit v. We use clipped-count matching: 

mw = X

> u

min ( cwr (u), c w 

> ˆr

(u)) , (8) 

mc = X

> v

min ( ccr (v), c c 

> ˆr

(v)) . (9) The total number of matched units is m = mw + mc. Let 

Nr denote the total number of word and character units in the reference text. We define mixed-unit coverage as 

Rmixed = mNr

. (10) Clipped-count matching prevents a repeated transcript unit from matching multiple occurrences in the reference. Impor-tantly, this score is an order-agnostic reference-unit coverage measure: it does not require the matched units to occur con-tiguously or in the same order as in the reference, and it does not penalize additional transcript units. This coverage score is used only to determine SCCA@0.60; mixed-unit precision and F1 are not reported as benchmark metrics. 

Speech Content satisfaction rate. Our primary speech metric is Speech Content satisfaction rate at a mixed-unit cov-erage threshold τ , denoted as SCCA@ τ . A speech-content item is counted as correct if its mixed-unit coverage reaches the threshold: 

sspeech  

> i

= 1 (Rmixed ,i ≥ τ ) . (11) For the Nspeech speech-content items, we compute 

SCCA@ τ = 1

Nspeech 

> Nspeech

X

> i=1

1 (Rmixed ,i ≥ τ ) . (12) We use τ = 0 .60 throughout the paper. Consequently, SCCA@0.60 measures whether the transcript contains clipped matches for at least 60% of the reference units under the mixed-unit coverage criterion. It is not an order-sensitive exact-transcription metric. The score pools clipped matches over Latin word units and Chinese character units; it does not use a maximum across unit types or any fixed-length prefix shortcut. 

Supplementary WER and CER diagnostics. WER and CER are computed from the same Qwen3-ASR tran-scripts used for speech-content evaluation. In contrast to SCCA@0.60, which is a rubric-level binary target-coverage metric over Nspeech = 163 speech-content rubrics, WER and CER are clip-level corpus transcription diagnostics. Consistent with the main-text statistics, the final bench-mark contains 163 speech-content rubrics associated with 83 clips containing target utterances. For the supplemen-tary clip-level transcription diagnostics, we construct a caption-derived reference transcript by concatenating quoted 

[Speaker ...] utterances in annotation order. This con-struction is available for 80 of the 83 target-utterance clips. The remaining three clips contain speech-related targets without a usable quoted utterance reference (e.g., indistinct or non-lexical vocal activity) and are excluded only from the WER/CER computation; they remain included in the speech-content benchmark and in SCCA@0.60. In the final evaluation cache, WER is computed over 

|J WER | = 69 valid reference clips containing a total of 1,503 

Latin word units, and CER is computed over |J CER | = 11 

valid reference clips containing a total of 309 Chinese CJK character units. A code-switched clip may contribute to both sets when it contains both unit types. Because CER is com-puted on a smaller Chinese-reference subset, it should be interpreted as a complementary diagnostic with additional caution. The resulting WER and CER values are reported in Table 10. 

Modality, composition, and complexity subsets. For modality-level analysis, rubrics items are grouped according to the queried modality, including scene, sound effects, back-ground music, and speech. In particular, Speech-modality rubrics satisfaction rate denotes rubrics satisfaction rate over rubrics associated with the speech modality; it is distinct from SCCA@0.60, which evaluates the linguistic content of synthesized speech through ASR transcripts. For composition analysis, samples are grouped by the set of modalities required by their prompts, such as Sound-only, Sound+Music, or Sound+Speech+Music. For complex-ity analysis, samples are grouped into Easy, Medium, and Hard subsets according to the benchmark’s event-density and structural-complexity annotations. All subset results use the same item-level correctness definition as the overall rubrics-based evaluation. 

Complementary global metrics. We additionally report global quality and alignment metrics as complementary measurements. Audiobox-Aesthetic provides content enjoy-ment (CE), content usefulness (CU), production complexity (PC), and production quality (PQ), where higher values indi-cate better predicted perceptual quality. CLAP MS measures global text–audio embedding similarity, where higher values indicate stronger coarse semantic alignment. Distribution-based metrics include Fréchet distances computed in pre-trained audio-feature spaces, Kullback–Leibler divergence (KL), and Inception Score (ISC). Lower Fréchet distance and KL are preferred, whereas higher ISC is preferred. These global metrics are not included in SR and are intended to complement, rather than replace, the proposed fine-grained semantic evaluation. 

# Human Evaluation Protocol 

To validate the effectiveness of our automatic evaluation framework, we conduct a human evaluation study on a subset Model Paradigm Text Encoder Audio Representation Generation Backbone                                                     

> AudioLDM 2 LD CLAP + FLAN-T5 AudioMAE + Mel VAE UNet Make-An-Audio 2 LD CLAP + T5 Mel VAE Transformer AudioGen Autoregressive T5 Conditioner EnCodec Tokenizer AR Transformer Tango 2 LD + DPO FLAN-T5 AudioLDM VAE UNet TangoFlux Flow Matching FLAN-T5 Stable Audio VAE Flux DiT EzAudio DiT FLAN-T5 Stable Audio VAE + DAC EzAudio-DiT MAGNeT Masked Modeling T5-Large EnCodec Tokenizer Non-AR Transformer Stable Audio Open DiT T5-Base Waveform VAE Diffusion Transformer MMAudio Flow Matching CLIP Mel VAE + BigVGAN MM-DiT Foley-Omni MM Flow Matching UM-T5 Mel VAE + BigVGAN Conditional DiT Omni2Sound Unified Diffusion FLAN-T5 Wav VAE DiT AudioStory LLM-guided Diffusion Qwen2.5 + T5 Whisper + VAE LLM Planner + DiT Dasheng AudioGen Unified Non-AR FLAN-T5-Large Dasheng Tokenizer Flow DiT

Table 7: Architectural overview of the 13 open-source text-to-audio (TTA) models evaluated in AudioScape-TTA. We summarize the generation paradigms, text encoders, audio representations, and generation backbones. LD denotes Latent Diffusion, DPO denotes Diffusion Preference Optimization, DiT denotes Diffusion Transformer, AR denotes Autoregressive, and Non-AR denotes Non-Autoregressive generation. For multimodal systems, only components relevant to text-to-audio generation are listed. of AudioScape-TTA. We randomly select 10 prompts cover-ing different modality compositions and complexity levels, and collect generated audio from all 13 evaluated TTA mod-els, resulting in 130 audio samples. The identities of the models are anonymized, and all samples are randomly shuf-fled before evaluation. Each audio sample is independently rated by 26 partici-pants. For each sample, participants evaluate three aspects: 

event completeness , attribute satisfaction , and audio quality .Event completeness measures whether the required sound events described in the prompt are present in the gener-ated audio. Attribute satisfaction rate evaluates whether fine-grained acoustic properties, such as sound source character-istics, temporal patterns, and other specified attributes, are correctly realized. Audio quality measures overall perceptual quality, including naturalness, coherence, and generation ar-tifacts. Participants are provided with the original text prompt and the generated audio, and rate each dimension independently using a 5-point Likert scale. For semantic dimensions ( event completeness and attribute satisfaction rate ), a higher score indicates that the generated audio better satisfies the cor-responding textual requirements. For audio quality , a higher score indicates better perceptual quality and fewer noticeable artifacts. The final human score for each sample is computed by averaging the ratings from all participants. These human judgments are then used to analyze the correlation between human perception and automatic evaluation metrics. 

# TTA Model Generation Protocol 

To ensure a model-native comparison across text-to-audio generation models, we follow the native text-conditioning interface of each model and report the input format, out-put configuration, and sampling settings. Unless otherwise specified, each model generates one audio sample per prompt without manual resampling, manual selection, or best-of out-put picking. 

Evaluation Input and Runtime Setup 

All evaluated models receive the text descriptions provided by AudioScape-TTA. The input CSV contains the fields 

name , caption , and struct_caption . The caption 

field contains the free-form natural language description and serves as the default generation prompt for most evaluated models. Most models directly use the free-form caption 

field as input. For models supporting structured prompting, i.e., Make-An-Audio-2 and Dasheng-AudioGen, the anno-tated struct_caption is converted into the correspond-ing model-specific prompt representation. All models are inferred on NVIDIA H20 GPUs with CUDA Version 12.5. 

Per-Model Generation Protocol 

We use the official open-source checkpoints and inference pipelines of all evaluated TTA models. Unless otherwise specified, each model generates one 10-second audio sam-ple per input prompt without manual selection or resampling. The reported configurations are collected from official check-points, released inference scripts, and configuration files. 

AudioLDM2 1 We use 200 diffusion steps with a 10-second generation length. 

Make-An-Audio-2 2 Generation uses DDIM sampling with 100 steps and guidance scale 4. 

AudioGen 3 The text caption is directly used with the default generation configuration of the official checkpoint. 

Tango 2 4 We use the default text-to-audio pipeline with 200 sampling steps and guidance scale 3. 

> 1https://huggingface.co/cvssp/audioldm2.
> 2https://huggingface.co/ByteDance/Make-An-Audio-2.
> 3https://huggingface.co/facebook/audiogen-medium.
> 4https://huggingface.co/declare-lab/tango2.

Model FD VGG ↓ FD PANN ↓ FD PASST ↓ KL PANN ↓ KL PaSST ↓ ISC PANN ↑ ISC PASST ↑

AudioLDM 2 4.816 15.342 229.479 1.787 1.694 8.157 7.600 Make-An-Audio 2 5.580 21.137 245.892 2.477 2.432 5.481 5.900 AudioGen 3.976 2.874 155.277 2.064 1.930 7.255 7.648 Tango 2 3.965 13.619 227.666 1.919 1.625 7.194 6.306 TangoFlux 4.504 19.405 266.794 1.990 1.755 8.344 7.283 EzAudio 2.514 9.711 119.163 1.851 1.740 8.291 8.515 MAGNeT 15.711 38.295 509.685 4.015 3.324 1.913 1.736 Stable Audio Open 3.114 14.089 199.270 2.035 1.912 9.418 8.678 

MMAudio 3.986 11.574 181.498 2.050 1.943 8.088 8.160 Foley-Omni 2.728 16.391 211.450 1.628 1.522 8.336 8.475 Omni2Sound 1.620 10.160 132.897 1.773 1.520 10.330 8.600 AudioStory 4.394 21.132 308.961 2.309 2.183 8.379 7.607 Dasheng AudioGen 3.174 17.661 202.953 1.948 1.737 9.527 8.323 

Table 8: Distribution-based audio quality metrics of open-source TTA models on AudioScape-TTA. These metrics evaluate global distributional similarity and perceptual quality in pretrained feature spaces and are reported as complementary analyses rather than components of the proposed semantic evaluation framework. The best and second-best results are highlighted in 

bold and underline, respectively. 

Model Sound Music Sound+Speech Sound+Music Speech+Music Sound+Speech+Music 

AudioLDM 2 69.19 84.93 52.37 70.54 56.25 48.60 Make-An-Audio 2 65.65 72.33 50.50 54.44 56.25 47.18 AudioGen 67.86 74.25 53.78 71.25 62.50 54.35 Tango 2 79.53 80.27 60.29 77.93 75.00 65.46 TangoFlux 81.42 76.16 65.61 72.12 62.50 56.70 EzAudio 80.22 87.40 63.11 81.08 75.00 66.28 MAGNeT 51.96 86.85 26.47 73.05 50.00 39.90 Stable Audio Open 70.01 73.42 48.57 65.13 56.25 46.91 MMAudio 67.36 77.53 48.46 68.08 43.75 46.63 Foley-Omni 80.63 84.93 69.36 82.54 87.50 72.69 Omni2Sound 78.51 84.66 66.08 80.70 75.00 71.98 AudioStory 70.73 72.02 62.12 69.90 43.75 57.91 Dasheng AudioGen 74.22 84.93 70.71 76.20 75.00 74.88 

Table 9: Semantic Satisfaction Rate (SR, %) of open-source text-to-audio generation models across samples with different modality compositions. The best and second-best results are highlighted in bold and underline, respectively. 

TangoFlux 5 Generation uses the default flow-matching con-figuration with 50 steps and guidance scale 4.5. 

EzAudio 6 We use the official inference configuration with 100 DDIM steps and guidance scale 5. 

MAGNeT 7 The official 10-second checkpoint is used with its default generation configuration. 

Stable Audio Open 8 We use the official inference configu-ration with 100 sampling steps and classifier-free guidance scale 7. 

MMAudio 9 The model generates audio using 25 sampling steps and guidance strength 4.5. 

Foley-Omni 10 We use the default text-to-audio setting with 

> 5

https://huggingface.co/declare-lab/TangoFlux. 

> 6

https://huggingface.co/OpenSound/EzAudio. 

> 7

https://huggingface.co/facebook/magnet-medium-10secs. 

> 8

https://huggingface.co/stabilityai/stable-audio-open-1.0. 

> 9

https://huggingface.co/hkchengrex/MMAudio. 

> 10

https://huggingface.co/CocoBro/Foley-Omni. 

50 sampling steps and audio guidance scale 3. 

Omni2Sound 11 The caption is converted into the required text prompt field. We use the default configuration with 100 steps and guidance scale 2.5. 

AudioStory 12 Generation uses 50 inference steps with guid-ance scale 4. 

Dasheng-AudioGen 13 We use the official inference pipeline. 

Model Architecture and Design Observations 

Although TTA performance depends on multiple factors, in-cluding training data, model scale, text supervision, and in-ference configuration, our benchmark reveals several archi-tectural and design tendencies among current open-source models. First, recent unified and diffusion-transformer (DiT)-based generation models tend to achieve stronger overall perfor-

> 11

https://huggingface.co/Dalision/Omni2Sound. 

> 12

https://huggingface.co/TencentARC/AudioStory-3B. 

> 13

https://huggingface.co/mispeech/Dasheng-AudioGen. mance in our evaluation compared with earlier autoregres-sive or masked-token systems. However, this observation may also be influenced by differences in training data, model scale, and optimization strategies. For example, Foley-Omni achieves the best overall performance and remains robust under hard and multi-modal settings, suggesting that unified modeling across speech, sound effects, and music can be ad-vantageous for structured soundscape generation. Similarly, EzAudio and Omni2Sound rank among the top-performing systems, indicating that recent unified generation paradigms provide strong semantic coverage and compositional capa-bility. Second, latent diffusion and flow-matching models gen-erally achieve competitive event-level alignment, but their fine-grained attribute fidelity varies substantially. Tango 2 and TangoFlux obtain strong overall performance, reflecting the strong text–audio alignment capability of these diffusion-based generation paradigms. However, their performance decreases more noticeably on hard and structurally com-plex samples, indicating that strong global prompt following does not necessarily guarantee reliable control over detailed acoustic attributes. This observation is consistent with our attribute-level evaluation, where current TTA systems still struggle with source identity, material characteristics, tempo-ral dynamics, spatial relations, and speaker-related attributes. Third, speech-content generation remains a distinct chal-lenge compared with general sound-event synthesis. Dasheng AudioGen achieves substantially better performance on speech-related evaluation, which is consistent with its speech-oriented modeling design and dedicated audio rep-resentation. In contrast, many general-purpose TTA models can generate speech-like acoustic patterns but fail to pre-serve verifiable linguistic content, highlighting the need for explicit speech-content modeling rather than treating speech as another generic audio event. Finally, the comparison between rubrics-based evaluation and conventional global similarity metrics demonstrates that strong global text–audio similarity does not necessarily im-ply fine-grained semantic correctness. Some models achieve competitive CLAP-based alignment scores but perform no-ticeably worse under event- and attribute-level rubrics-based evaluation. This indicates that optimizing for perceptual plau-sibility or coarse text–audio alignment alone is insufficient to satisfy structured semantic requirements. Overall, our find-ings suggest that future TTA systems should combine high-quality acoustic generation with stronger mechanisms for explicit event grounding, fine-grained attribute control, re-liable speech-content preservation, and robust multi-modal composition. 

# Additional Experimental Results 

Modality-combination Analysis 

In the main paper, we analyze modality-level performance by grouping rubrics pairs according to the queried modality, i.e., 

sound , music , and speech . This reveals the modality-specific strengths of different models. In contrast, here we group each sample according to the modality composition required by its prompt. Therefore, this analysis evaluates compositional                             

> Model WER ↓CER ↓
> AudioLDM 2 1.1949 1.0000 Make-An-Audio 2 1.0093 1.0000 AudioGen 1.1284 1.0000 Tango 2 1.2448 1.1294 TangoFlux 1.1756 0.9968 EzAudio 1.2582 0.9968 MAGNeT 1.8603 1.0000 Stable Audio Open 1.0745 1.0712 MMAudio 1.0153 1.0000 Foley-Omni 0.5469 0.9191
> Omni2Sound 1.0253 1.0000 AudioStory 1.1564 1.0356 Dasheng AudioGen 0.2395 0.9935

Table 10: Supplementary clip-level ASR transcription di-agnostics. WER is computed over 69 valid reference clips containing 1,503 Latin word units, while CER is computed over 11 valid reference clips containing 309 Chinese CJK character units. Both metrics are computed from Qwen3-ASR transcripts of generated audio and caption-derived tar-get utterances. They are complementary diagnostics and do not alter the 163-rubric SCCA@0.60 benchmark evaluation. The best and second-best results are highlighted in bold and underline, respectively. 

robustness rather than isolated modality-specific capability. The results are shown in Table 9. The results show that strong single-modality performance does not always transfer to multi-modal settings. TangoFlux achieves the highest satisfaction rate on Sound -only samples (81.42% ), but drops substantially on Sound+Speech+Music 

samples (56.70%). Similarly, MAGNeT performs com-petitively on Music -only samples (86.85%), yet strug-gles on Sound+Speech (26.47%) and Sound+Speech+Music 

(39.90%). These results suggest that generating isolated sound or music events is insufficient for handling complex prompts where multiple modalities co-occur. For mixed Sound+Music scenes, Foley-Omni achieves the best satisfaction rate ( 82.54% ), outperforming EzA-udio (81.08%) and Omni2Sound (80.70%). This comple-ments the main-paper findings: Foley-Omni is not only strong on sound-effect questions, but also better at coordi-nating sound events with background music within the same scene. For speech-involved compositions, Dasheng Audio-Gen performs best on both Sound+Speech (70.71% ) and 

Sound+Speech+Music (74.88% ), consistent with its supe-rior speech-content satisfaction rate reported in the main pa-per. This indicates that speech generation becomes a key bot-tleneck when speech is embedded in complex multi-modal scenes. Overall, this analysis demonstrates that modality-composition evaluation provides complementary insights be-yond conventional modality-wise evaluation. Foley-Omni exhibits strong compositional robustness across different modality combinations, EzAudio remains highly competitive in music-involved scenarios, and Dasheng AudioGen is par-ticularly effective on speech-involved compositions. These Model SCCA@0 .40 SCCA@0 .50 SCCA@0 .60 SCCA@0 .70 SCCA@0 .80                                                                  

> AudioLDM 2 1.23 1.23 0.00 0.00 0.00 Make-An-Audio 2 1.23 1.23 0.00 0.00 0.00 AudioGen 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 Tango 2 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 TangoFlux 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 EzAudio 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 MAGNeT 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 Stable Audio Open 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 MMAudio 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 Foley-Omni 68.10 66.26 57.06 50.92 45.40 Omni2Sound 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 AudioStory 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 Dasheng AudioGen 80.98 80.37 77.30 72.39 68.71

Table 11: Speech-Content Coverage Satisfaction Rate (%) at Different Thresholds under different SCCA thresholds. Each value is the percentage of 163 speech-content rubrics whose mixed-unit target coverage is at least τ .findings further highlight the importance of fine-grained compositional evaluation for text-to-audio generation sys-tems. 

Audio Quality Evaluation 

In addition to semantic requirement satisfaction, we report conventional perceptual and distribution-based metrics as complementary analyses. Specifically, Audiobox-Aesthetic evaluates perceptual quality from multiple dimensions, in-cluding clarity, coherence, production complexity, and over-all quality. Distribution-based metrics, including Fréchet dis-tance (FD), KL divergence, and Inception Score (ISC), mea-sure the similarity and diversity of generated audio feature distributions. Table 13 and Table 8 summarize these complementary evaluations. The rankings obtained from these metrics are not always consistent with semantic requirement satisfac-tion. For example, models achieving strong distributional similarity or perceptual scores do not necessarily achieve the highest semantic satisfaction rates. This difference is expected because these metrics mainly characterize global audio quality, realism, or feature-level distribution matching, while our rubrics-based evaluation directly verifies whether prompt-specified semantic requirements are realized. Therefore, these metrics are reported to provide a broader view of model performance, but are not used as the primary criteria for evaluating structured soundscape instruction fol-lowing. 

Additional Speech Content Evaluation 

Additional Speech-Content Diagnostics. Besides the bi-nary speech-content satisfaction rate reported in the main paper using SCCA@0.60, we additionally report Word Error Rate (WER) and Character Error Rate (CER) in Table 10. These metrics are computed only for samples containing speech by comparing ASR transcriptions against the refer-ence text. Unlike SCCA@0.60, which measures whether the re-quired speech content is sufficiently covered for semantic             

> Comparison Spearman ρTwo-sided p
> SCCA@0 .60 vs. −WER 0.629 0.021
> SCCA@0 .60 vs. −CER 0.653 0.015

Table 12: Coarse model-level rank agreement between SCCA@0.60 and complementary clip-level edit-distance di-agnostics across 13 TTA models. evaluation, WER and CER quantify full transcription similar-ity and are therefore more sensitive to insertion, deletion, and substitution errors. Since many evaluated open-source TTA models are not explicitly designed for controllable speech generation, WER/CER are reported as complementary anal-yses rather than used in the benchmark’s primary semantic ranking. 

Speech-content coverage threshold sensitivity. Table 11 shows that the central speech conclusion is not driven by the choice of τ = 0.60 . Across the stricter range τ ∈{0.60 , 0.70 , 0.80 }, Dasheng AudioGen consistently obtains the highest SCCA, while Foley-Omni consistently ranks sec-ond. Lowering the threshold to 0.40 or 0.50 yields only marginal non-zero scores (1.23%) for AudioLDM 2 and Make-An-Audio 2, while preserving the same two leading models. 

Correlation between SCCA and WER. Table 12 com-pares SCCA@0.60 with the complementary ASR transcrip-tion diagnostics at the model level. We compute Spearman correlation using average ranks for tied SCCA scores and correlate SCCA@0.60 with −WER and −CER , since lower edit error indicates better transcription fidelity. SCCA@0.60 shows moderate positive agreement with −WER (ρ =0.629 , p = 0 .021 ) and −CER (ρ = 0 .653 , p = 0 .015 ). Because most general-purpose models obtain tied zero SCCA@0.60 scores, these results should be interpreted as coarse agreement between target-content coverage and edit-distance-based transcription fidelity, rather than as a fine-grained ranking among lower-performing systems. Model CE ↑ CU ↑ PC ↑ PQ ↑                                                    

> AudioLDM 2 4.21 6.04 3.45 6.34 Make-An-Audio 2 3.37 5.14 3.15 5.67 AudioGen 3.24 4.57 3.60 5.26 Tango 2 4.13 5.61 4.32 6.18 TangoFlux 4.27 5.53 4.04 6.02 EzAudio 4.16 5.58 4.07 5.96 MAGNeT 4.20 5.11 5.28 5.74 Stable Audio Open 3.38 6.33 1.96 6.64
> MMAudio 3.79 5.25 3.33 5.77 Foley-Omni 4.14 5.56 3.65 5.88 Omni2Sound 4.21 5.80 3.95 6.24 AudioStory 3.96 5.36 3.33 5.94 Dasheng AudioGen 4.29 5.81 3.56 6.18

Table 13: Audiobox-Aesthetic evaluation results of open-source TTA models on AudioScape-TTA. CE, CU, PC, and PQ denote the aesthetic dimensions measured by Audiobox. These metrics evaluate perceptual audio quality and are re-ported as complementary analyses rather than semantic re-quirement evaluation. The best and second-best results are highlighted in bold and underline, respectively. 

Sanity Checks for Audio-Grounded Rubric-Based Evaluation 

Audio-conditioned controls. To verify whether rubrics performance genuinely relies on acoustic evidence, we con-duct two audio-conditioned control experiments using the reference-audio rubrics pairs. These experiments follow the same audio-conditioned setting as our evaluation protocol, where each rubrics item is evaluated together with an audio input. In the audio-masked setting, the original audio is re-placed with a silent clip. In the shuffled-audio setting, each question is paired with the reference audio from a randomly selected different sample. As shown in Table 14, both con-trol settings lead to a substantial drop in Overall SR, Event SR, and Attribute SR compared with the correctly matched reference-audio setting. SR follows the benchmark definition and includes event-presence, event-attribute, and thresholded speech-content correctness. These results demonstrate that high semantic satisfaction rates depend on informative and correctly matched audio evidence rather than the question format alone. 

Evaluator capability check. To investigate whether re-maining errors on reference audio are partially caused by evaluator limitations, we additionally evaluate the same QA pairs using Gemini, a stronger audio-language model. As shown in Table 15, Gemini-2.5-Pro achieves an Overall rubric satisfaction rate of 95.03% on the same rubric an-notations and reference audio, substantially outperforming Qwen3-Omni-Instruct. The higher agreement obtained with Gemini-2.5-Pro is consistent with evaluator capacity affect-ing reference-audio rubric scores, but does not definitively separate evaluator errors from rubric-construction errors. Therefore, while we adopt Qwen3-Omni-Instruct throughout the benchmark for accessibility and reproducibility, the pro-posed evaluation protocol remains compatible with stronger audio-language models and can benefit from future improve-            

> Setting Overall SR Event SR Attribute SR
> Reference Audio 84.88 85.60 84.37
> Audio Masked 18.31 10.42 23.99 Shuffled Audio 25.88 22.84 28.07

Table 14: Audio-conditioned control experiments using ma-nipulated reference audio. The results demonstrate that rubrics-based evaluation requires informative and correctly matched acoustic evidence.        

> Evaluator Overall SR Event SR Attribute SR
> Qwen3-Omni-Instruct 84.88 85.60 84.37 Gemini-2.5-Pro 95.03 96.64 93.87

Table 15: Evaluator capability check on the reference-audio QA pairs. Gemini-2.5-Pro is included as a stronger reference evaluator to to assess the effect of evaluator capacity on reference-audio rubric scores. ments in audio reasoning capability. 

Evaluator Bias and Answer-Position Analysis 

Our main semantic satisfaction metric measures whether prompt-specified requirements are realized in generated au-dio. Since the benchmark rubrics are formulated as positive requirement verification questions, we additionally analyze two potential evaluator biases: (i) a tendency to answer “Yes” regardless of audio evidence, and (ii) sensitivity to the posi-tion of the affirmative answer. These analyses evaluate eval-uator reliability and do not extend the main metric into an open-ended extra-content hallucination measure. 

Balanced reference-audio sensitivity analysis. We con-struct a contrastive subset from reference audio by pairing each event-presence or event-attribute positive rubric with a same-modality contrastive target that is absent from the reference clip. To avoid exposing the intended polarity to the evaluator, candidate rubrics are independently verified using two Gemini-2.5-Pro prompts without providing the expected label, candidate source, or polarity. We retain only complete positive-negative pairs for which both items pass verifica-tion. The resulting held-out subset contains 452 semantic items from 226 complete pairs, with balanced labels (226 “Yes” and 226 “No” items). We evaluate Qwen3-Omni-Instruct under both an-swer orders for every item (“Yes” as option A and “Yes” as option B), resulting in 904 evaluator calls. As shown in Ta-ble 16, Qwen3-Omni-Instruct achieves high discrimination capability on the reference-audio subset, with 94.25% recall, 4.42% false-positive rate, and 94.91% balanced accuracy. These results rule out a trivial always-“Yes” answering strat-egy and indicate limited answer-position sensitivity in this controlled reference-audio analysis. Importantly, this experiment is a Gemini-verified reference-audio robustness analysis rather than a human-annotated calibration set. Therefore, the reported false-positive rate, precision, and calibration statistics should be Metric Result          

> Recall (TPR) 94 .25%
> False-positive rate (FPR) 4.42%
> Specificity (TNR) 95 .58%
> Precision 95 .52%
> F1 score 94 .88%
> Accuracy 94 .91%
> Balanced accuracy 94 .91%
> ECE 0.0197
> Brier score 0.0373

Table 16: Evaluator sensitivity analysis of 

Qwen3-Omni-Instruct on the Gemini-verified reference-audio subset. TPR (recall) measures the fraction of verified satisfied requirements correctly identified by the evaluator, while FPR measures the fraction of verified unsatisfied requirements incorrectly predicted as satisfied. TNR denotes specificity ( 1 − FPR ). Precision and F1 quan-tify the discrimination quality of affirmative predictions. ECE and Brier score measure probability calibration. The subset contains 452 balanced semantic items, including 226 positive and 226 negative items.          

> Metric Spearman ρTop-3 Overlap
> Overall Semantic Satisfaction 0.979 3/3 Event Semantic Satisfaction 0.937 3/3 Attribute Semantic Satisfaction 0.993 3/3

Table 17: Robustness of benchmark-level model rankings to answer-order randomization across 13 TTA systems. Spear-man correlation is computed between the fixed-order and randomized-order model rankings. interpreted as evaluator sensitivity estimates with respect to the verified subset, rather than definitive human-grounded error rates. 

Answer-position sensitivity. We further randomize whether the affirmative answer appears as option A or option B. On the balanced reference-audio subset, the balanced-accuracy gap between the two answer orders is 1.33 per-centage points, and only 14 of 452 semantic items ( 3.10% )receive different semantic predictions under the two orders. This suggests limited answer-position sensitivity at the item level in the controlled setting. We further assess whether answer-order randomization af-fects the relative comparison among evaluated TTA systems. As shown in Table 17, the fixed-order and randomized-order model rankings exhibit strong agreement, with Spearman correlations ranging from 0.937 to 0.993 across semantic dimensions. The top-three models are identical under both protocols for overall, event-level, and attribute-level semantic satisfaction. These results indicate that the benchmark-level comparative conclusions are robust to answer-order random-ization. 

Scope of contrastive negatives. The contrastive negative rubrics above are used only to measure evaluator presence– absence discrimination on reference audio. They are not used to penalize generated audio for containing arbitrary addi-tional sounds: a sound absent from a reference clip may still be compatible with a generation prompt. Accordingly, our se-mantic satisfaction metric measures satisfaction of prompt-specified target content, rather than unrestricted extra-content hallucination. Evaluating the latter would require prompts or annotations with explicit forbidden sound constraints, or dedicated human judgments.