VoCa: Designing Speech–Canvas Interaction for Voice-Based
Conversational Agents
Yate Ge
Tongji University
Shanghai, China
geyate@tongji.edu.cn
Run Yuan
Tongji University
Shanghai, China
yuanrun0607@gmail.com
Yueran Qi
Grinnell College
Grinnell, Iowa, United States
qisarah@grinnell.edu
Wenjie He
Tongji University
Shanghai, China
hewenjie_0425@tongji.edu.cn
Jiaqi Mo
Tongji University
Shanghai, China
mojiaqi@tongji.edu.cn
Yangshuo Chen
Hunan University
Changsha, Hunan, China
franchesca@hnu.edu.cn
Wenbin Zuo
Tongji University
Shanghai, China
wbzuo@tongji.edu.cn
Xiaohua Sun∗
Southern University of Science and
Technology
Shenzhen, Guangdong, China
sunxh@sustech.edu.cn
Weiwei Guo∗
Tongji University
Shanghai, China
weiweiguo@tongji.edu.cn
Qi Wang
Tongji University
Shanghai, China
qiwangdesign@tongji.edu.cn
Figure 1: VoCa is a voice agent that coordinates speech with actions on the Canvas during multi-turn conversations. It creates
and develops Visual Objects, adds Annotations, and directs attention to relevant content, allowing users and the agent to refer
to, revisit, and continue developing shared content across turns.
Abstract
People write and sketch while speaking to explain, organize, and
develop content together. Inspired by these practices, we investigate
how voice agents can use a canvas alongside speech in multi-turn
conversations with users. We conducted a two-part formative study:
∗Corresponding authors.
an observational study of how pairs coordinated speech and board-
work, followed by a design workshop that informed a design space
for speech–canvas interaction with voice agents. Building on these
insights, we developed VoCa, a voice agent that coordinates speech
with visual object creation, annotation, and attention guidance. A
five-day deployment with 18 participants examined usability, expe-
riences of speech–canvas interaction, patterns of use, and desired
arXiv:2610.04706v1  [cs.HC]  3 Oct 2026


improvements. Participants’ experiences highlighted opportuni-
ties for speech–canvas interaction in learning, work, and daily life,
alongside challenges in coordinating what agents say and show in
ways users can follow and influence. These findings inform how
voice agents can use a canvas alongside speech in conversation.
CCS Concepts
• Human-centered computing →Natural language interfaces;
Interaction design; Empirical studies in HCI.
Keywords
voice agent, conversational interfaces, speech–canvas interaction,
generative user interfaces, human–AI interaction
1
Introduction
Voice-based conversational agents allow people to interact with
computational systems through spoken exchanges. With agents
powered by large language models, these exchanges can extend
across turns as users ask follow-up questions, seek clarification,
and develop ideas [38]. Voice products such as OpenAI’s Chat-
GPT Voice1 and Google’s Gemini Live2 support real-time spoken
exchanges with natural-sounding speech and user interruptions.
Research on full-duplex dialogue and interruption-aware voice
agents likewise shows a shift beyond rigid, turn-by-turn exchanges
[34, 60]. Recent systems have applied voice agents to learning, per-
sonal record keeping, and multi-step interaction with graphical
interfaces [18, 57, 61]. Together, these developments create oppor-
tunities for sustained voice-based interaction across learning, work,
and daily life. However, as such conversations accumulate infor-
mation across turns, speech alone provides few stable handles for
inspecting relationships, referring back precisely, or revising earlier
content. Studies of speech-based thought externalization report a
related difficulty: extended spoken material and its linear transcript
can be difficult to review, reorganize, and synthesize [33].
In human conversation, people often combine speech with writ-
ing, sketching, and pointing to explain ideas and develop under-
standing together. External representations can make relationships
explicit and support reasoning [47], while shared visual materials
help people establish what they are referring to [15]. Boardwork
illustrates how spoken explanations and visual representations
develop together over time [54]. These practices suggest an oppor-
tunity for voice agents as they engage in conversations that involve
connecting ideas, clarifying relationships, and working through
questions across turns. A canvas could make relevant content visi-
ble for users and agents to refer to as they speak, and allow that
content to develop through subsequent explanations, questions,
and responses. For example, a diagram introduced during an expla-
nation could become the focus of a follow-up question, prompting
the agent to point to or annotate the relevant part.
Prior work has explored visual feedback about a voice agent’s
state and processing [25, 42], grounding spoken references in vis-
ible objects [21, 31], contextual visual aids and co-speech draw-
ing [14, 35, 36, 46], and interactive visual interfaces generated for
language-model interaction [7, 9, 23]. These efforts establish several
1https://help.openai.com/en/articles/20001274
2https://gemini.google/overview/gemini-live/
ways speech and visual interfaces can complement one another. We
investigate how a voice agent’s decisions about what to say, show,
and change on a canvas shape users’ opportunities to understand
content, express their needs, and develop ideas with the agent. This
involves both coordinating the agent’s speech and canvas actions
and enabling users to influence subsequent turns through speech
and visible content. We examine these design choices and their use
in learning, work, and daily life.
Supporting such interaction requires a voice agent to coordinate
what it says with what it shows or changes on the Canvas: whether
to use visual support in a turn, what to show or change, how to
represent and organize the content, and when those actions occur
in relation to speech. This coordination affects how an explana-
tion unfolds, what users can point to or ask about, and how the
conversation proceeds from there.
To inform the design of this interaction, we conducted a forma-
tive study comprising an observational study and a design work-
shop. In the observational study, 12 participants worked in six pairs,
each completing three discussion tasks using a digital whiteboard.
One participant operated the digital whiteboard while both dis-
cussed the topic. We then conducted a design workshop in two
sessions to explore how voice agents could participate in conver-
sations through speech and canvas actions. From the workshop
materials, we developed a design space describing how canvas con-
tent is organized and developed, how users and agents act on it,
and how those actions relate to speech over time.
Informed by these findings and design explorations, we devel-
oped VoCa (Figure 1). Within this broader scope, VoCa focuses on
how a voice agent coordinates speech and canvas actions during
interaction with users. It creates visual objects, adds annotations,
and directs attention in coordination with speech, using the current
Canvas to inform what it says and does next. Users participate
through speech, with selections and the current canvas view help-
ing the agent interpret references to visible content.
To examine this interaction in use, we conducted an exploratory
five-day deployment study with 18 participants, who used VoCa for
self-selected everyday activities across devices. We collected inter-
action logs, Session Reflections, a post-deployment questionnaire,
and semi-structured interviews. Combining descriptive analysis
of the questionnaire with qualitative analysis of participants’ ac-
counts and interaction logs, we examined how participants assessed
VoCa’s usability and experienced its speech–canvas interaction,
how they used it in everyday activities, and what improvements
they wanted.
This paper makes the following contributions:
• A formative study revealing how people externalize content,
link it to speech, and develop it as paired discussions unfold,
together with a design space for speech–canvas interaction
with voice agents;
• VoCa, a voice agent that uses speech and Canvas actions as
coordinated ways of participating in conversation. It jointly
plans spoken responses with visual-object creation, annota-
tion, and attention guidance using the evolving Canvas as
context, while users guide subsequent expression through
speech and selection; and
2


• An exploratory five-day deployment study of VoCa with 18
participants, evaluating its usability and examining how par-
ticipants experienced its speech–canvas interaction and used
it in everyday activities. Based on the findings, we discuss
the value, application opportunities, and design implications
of speech–canvas interaction with voice agents.
2
Related Work
2.1
Voice-Based Conversational Agents
People use voice interfaces to access information and services
within ongoing activities, with interaction shaped by their practical
needs and surrounding social settings [3, 43]. With large language
models, voice agents increasingly support open-ended, multi-turn
conversations, allowing users to elaborate on requests, ask follow-
up questions, and develop ideas through dialogue [38, 62]. Advances
in speech modeling also support interruption, backchanneling, and
overlapping speech, expanding how users and agents can partic-
ipate in spoken exchanges [34, 60]. Systems such as OpenMAIC
[57], TellTime [18], and GPTVoiceTasker [61] illustrate applications
in learning, personal record keeping, and multi-step GUI tasks. To-
gether, these developments broaden what voice agents can support
and the settings in which people use them. They also raise the
question of how visual interaction can become part of an ongo-
ing voice conversation. Our study addresses this question through
speech–canvas interaction.
2.2
Visual Interfaces in Voice Interaction
Research comparing voice and screen-based interaction shows that
modality shapes how users carry out agent-assisted activities [8, 45].
Existing systems use visuals to communicate a voice interface’s
conversational state [42], expose an agent’s intermediate process-
ing [25], or provide richer in-vehicle feedback [4]. Research also
studies how proactive agents adapt auditory and visual presenta-
tion to context [28]. Visible materials can also carry interaction
content: shared materials can maintain a record of the problem
state [11], while shared visual information can support reference
and grounding in collaborative tasks [15]. Recent systems ground
spoken references in on-screen content [21] or physical surround-
ings using gaze and pointing [31]. Systems also visually externalize
their interpretation of an ambiguous spoken query [27]. Together,
this work shows how a visual surface can carry system feedback,
task information, and shared referents within voice interaction.
Speech also provides a way to act on graphical content. Systems
coordinate graphical interfaces and voice agents [50], combine
speech and sketch to specify interface actions or create and revise
graphical worlds [20, 46], or enable speech-driven AR authoring
with direct manipulation [29]. Other work enables voice control
of mobile or scientific interfaces [19, 22, 61], or uses pointer con-
text and low-interruption feedback to connect speech to ongoing
software work [16]. Architectural work connects existing GUIs
with conversational assistants [59]. Studies of human boardwork
examine how visual content takes shape during spoken interaction.
Speakers selectively write and connect content as an explanation
and others’ contributions develop; speech, diagrams, spatial orga-
nization, and pointing jointly shape the resulting representation
[53–55]. These findings align with research on multiple representa-
tions, which emphasizes complementary functions and clear rela-
tions among representations [1, 40]. Together, these studies direct
attention to both the visual form of content and how speech, spatial
organization, and pointing organize its use.
Recent work brings these concerns into co-speech visual gen-
eration. Visual Captions proposed a design space for augmenting
human–human verbal communication, characterizing when, for
whom, and in what form visuals are presented, alongside commu-
nication setting, privacy, initiation, and interaction modality [35].
GenComUI coordinates speech and generated task visuals for itera-
tive task confirmation and refinement in robot programming [14].
AmIWrite studies co-speech handwriting within mathematics tutor-
ing [36], while OpenMAIC explores co-speech writing and drawing
[57]. Other systems use shared visual input for situated conver-
sation [17]. Complementary work generates whiteboard drawing
sequences conditioned on narration [44]. Emerging datasets and
systems also investigate temporally aligned sketch–speech input
and proactive diagram completion [12, 49]. Across these strands,
prior work establishes multiple roles for visual interfaces along-
side speech. Our study focuses on how a voice agent uses speech
and a Canvas together in an ongoing conversation, and how users
participate in that conversation.
2.3
Generative Visual Interfaces for Human–AI
Interaction
Large language models enable interfaces to be generated in re-
sponse to users’ requests and context [9]. Generated responses
range from interface components [56] to problem representations
that learners can inspect and annotate during tutoring, as in In-
teractive Sketchpad [30]. Other systems transform model output
into entity–relation diagrams, multilevel spatial structures, and
organized design alternatives [23, 51, 52], or make conversational
goals and branching histories visible across turns [2, 10]. These sys-
tems show how generated interfaces can organize content, expose
relationships, and provide entry points for subsequent interaction.
Generative interfaces can also remain malleable after their initial
creation. Jelly uses an evolving task-driven data model to preserve
data across interface changes, DynaVis generates persistent con-
trols for visualization editing, and other systems maintain corre-
spondences between requirements, GUI prototypes, programs, and
diagrams [7, 13, 26, 58]. Data Player further demonstrates explicit
coordination between narration and visual animation in generated
presentations [48].
Other work treats the canvas as a space in which people and
agents develop content over time. Orality extracts and organizes a
user’s spoken thoughts on a malleable semantic canvas for individ-
ual reflection; CoMAP supports learning design in a shared graph
workspace; and the open-source Huabu project brings materials
and agents into a persistent workspace [32, 33, 41]. This line of
work shows how generated visual content can organize interaction
and continue developing over time. Our study examines the role of
such content within ongoing interaction between users and a voice
agent.
3


3
Formative Study
To inform the design of speech–canvas interaction with voice
agents, we examined how people combined speech and whiteboard
use during paired discussions. We focused on what participants
externalized, how board actions accompanied speech, and how exist-
ing content supported later discussion. A subsequent design work-
shop explored possibilities for users and voice agents to interact
through speech and a canvas. Figure 2 summarizes the procedure.
3.1
Procedure
We recruited 12 university students across two days (six per day).
All provided informed consent and received RMB 100 each. In
Part 1, each pair completed three discussion tasks: explaining a
topic, developing a solution or proposal, and making a decision or
plan, yielding 18 sessions. Task sheets specified goals and suggested
topics; pairs could choose their own topics within each task type.
Both participants spoke, while one operated the digital whiteboard.
We recorded speech and board activity and conducted brief follow-
up interviews about participants’ reasons for their actions.
In Part 2, each group of six joined a one-hour design workshop.
We introduced three application contexts: a meeting-room interac-
tive whiteboard, a desktop educational robot, and a mobile app with
a voice agent. A concept video illustrated an agent using a canvas
while discussing soccer rules with a user. Participants recorded
ideas for agent canvas actions and desired interaction experiences
on sticky notes and explained them to the group.
Two researchers coded speech and board actions in the Part 1
videos, grouping similar observations into descriptive codes and
reconciling their interpretations with reference to the interviews
(Appendix E). For Part 2, we used affinity diagramming to group
ideas by meaning, interpreting the sticky notes alongside partici-
pants’ explanations and using these groups to inform our synthesis
of the design space.
3.2
Findings from the Observational Study
3.2.1
What Did Participants Put on the Board, and Why?
Participants selected what to draw alongside speech. In a follow-
up interview, one participant explained that they used speech or
gestures for simple concepts but began drawing when describing
an entire media-streaming process that they found difficult to con-
vey through gestures alone. Other episodes showed how selected
information took visual form: in a snowboarding explanation, the
speaker sketched a board and its bindings, then added edge labels
and movement paths. In a scheduling discussion, the board opera-
tor recorded dates and commitments while their partner described
them, adding stars to mark obligations. These marks gave the visi-
ble content different roles: a structure to explain, details to locate
within it, or constraints to retain while considering a plan. The nine
board-action codes in Table 4 describe these uses and the other
actions observed in the study.
3.2.2
How Did Speech and Board Actions Coordinate? Writ-
ing or drawing accompanied related speech in all 18 sessions. Partic-
ipants also referred to existing content through speech and pointing
in 17 sessions, and questions or feedback prompted visual updates
in 17 (Table 5). In a guitar explanation, the speaker indicated strings
on the drawing and added an arrow while explaining their differ-
ences. During a card-game explanation, a question about which
roles were publicly known led the speaker to add a visibility label
above an existing role name. Board actions thus accompanied both
the speaker’s account and their responses to the partner, linking an
explanation to a particular part of the visible content. Coordination
also included other local sequences, such as drawing a framework
before explaining it, which occurred in six sessions.
3.2.3
How Did Participants Revisit and Develop Existing
Content? In the card-game session, a circular arrangement ini-
tially showed players’ turn order. Later, the partner reviewed the
notes and asked about distance rules; the speaker returned to the
circle and annotated the distance between two positions. The same
structure now served a further explanation. Across the study, par-
ticipants revisited earlier content in 12 sessions.
More substantial reorganization accompanied a change in dis-
cussion stage in ten sessions. In a scheduling session, participants
first listed commitments and marked their priorities. They sub-
sequently drew a timeline placing work, a wedding, and possible
travel dates together, then produced a numbered plan that separated
the proposed itinerary from a gathering whose timing still needed
discussion. This sequence moved from collecting constraints to con-
sidering their temporal relationships and consolidating an arrange-
ment. It illustrates how continued board use involved changing
the organization and purpose of visible content as well as adding
information.
3.3
A Design Space for Speech–Canvas
Interaction with Voice Agents
Informed by the design workshop, we developed a design space
for speech–canvas interaction with voice agents (Figure 3). Its six
dimensions describe choices about how content is expressed and
developed, how users and agents act on it, and how these actions
unfold within the conversation. The design space offers a basis
for exploring and selecting interaction designs suited to different
conversational contexts.
D1. Canvas Content. This dimension concerns how informa-
tion from a conversation becomes canvas content and what visual
form it takes. Speech–Canvas Content Mapping includes preserving
the original expression (record), selecting key information (extract),
integrating information within or across turns (synthesize), making
relations or processes explicit (restructure), and contributing infor-
mation beyond what has been spoken (extend). These mappings can
work together: selected information can also be organized into a re-
lational structure. Visual Form concerns how the result is expressed.
Text carries verbal content; diagrams express relationships; frames
provide structures that can be filled over time; and annotations
attach emphasis, comments, or status to existing content. Media
provides images, audio, or video, while interactive components
respond to user operations through changes in state.
D2. Canvas Content Evolution. Workshop proposals included
retaining intermediate plans for later comparison and periodically
consolidating content as ideas were revised or rejected. This dimen-
sion describes how canvas content develops over time. Appending
4


Figure 2: Overview of the formative study, conducted over two days with six participants per day. Part 1 comprised an
introduction, three discussion tasks completed in pairs on a shared digital whiteboard, and brief semi-structured interviews
about observed whiteboard use. Part 2 introduced three application contexts and a concept video, followed by a six-person
group discussion of possible agent canvas actions and desired interaction experiences.
adds content while retaining what is already present. Revising up-
dates existing content or its structure. Versioning retains earlier
states for later review, whereas branching allows alternatives to
develop separately from a common starting point. These choices
affect whether users encounter an updated account, a history of
changes, or parallel directions they can continue exploring. They
can be combined: a branch can accumulate additions and retain
versions of its revisions.
D3. Agent Canvas Actions. This dimension describes the ac-
tions available to an agent. An agent can direct attention by pointing
to content or bringing it into view (attend), create content, and con-
nect, group, or arrange it (organize). It can add marks or comments
to existing content (annotate), modify the content itself (revise), and
remove content or restore an earlier state. These actions determine
how an agent can use both new and existing canvas content during
a conversation. D3 describes what actions are taken on canvas con-
tent, while D2 describes how changes are retained and developed
over time.
D4. User Interaction with the Canvas. Users can participate
through User Actions and Context Signals. Selection identifies an ob-
ject, passage, or region; navigation changes the view; manipulation
moves or resizes objects or operates interactive components; and
editing adds, changes, or removes content. These actions let users
refer to material, browse it, and contribute directly. Context signals
provide additional information for the agent: the viewport indicates
what is visible, while gaze can indicate what the user is looking
at. A system can use these signals alongside speech to interpret
references without requiring an explicit selection each time.
D5. Temporal Coordination. Timing preferences varied across
workshop notes: one requested a completed canvas before explana-
tion, while another proposed speaking and drawing together. We
distinguish two timing choices. Speech–Canvas Timing concerns
the relation between an agent’s utterance and a related canvas
action: the action can precede the speech (canvas first), follow it
(speech first), or occur at the corresponding moment in the ut-
terance (synchronized). Different parts of a conversation can use
different arrangements. Input Feedback Timing concerns feedback
on the user’s input. A system may provide none, present a record
or interpretation after the user’s turn, or update feedback live while
the user speaks. Live feedback can also be refined after the turn
ends.
D6. Agent Initiative. An agent can act on the canvas in response
to an explicit user request (on request), independently propose
an action and wait for user acceptance (proactive suggestion), or
decide and act without a separate request or confirmation for that
action (proactive action). These arrangements distinguish delegated
execution, opportunities to review suggestions, and agent action
without prior review. Workshop proposals ranged from background
organization with automatic highlighting at key discussion points
to presenting proposed edits as annotations for user review. A
system can combine different arrangements across actions.
3.4
Summary
The observations provide design grounding for selective external-
ization, coordination with speech, and continued use of existing
content, consistent with prior accounts of boardwork and visual
aids in communication [14, 54]. Workshop proposals informed our
synthesis of the design space for speech–canvas interaction with
voice agents. Together, these informed the design goals for VoCa
in the next section.
4
System Design
4.1
Design Goals
Drawing on the formative findings and design space (Section 3),
we formulated three design goals for VoCa.
DG1: Externalize Content in Forms Suited to the Conversa-
tion. Participants selectively recorded information and used dif-
ferent visual structures to support explanation, comparison, and
planning. These practices motivate selecting what to externalize
5


Figure 3: Design space for speech–canvas interaction with voice agents informed by the design workshop. D1–D2 describe
canvas content and its evolution; D3–D6 describe agent actions, user interaction, temporal coordination, and agent initiative.
Values within a dimension represent alternatives or capabilities that a system may combine.
and how to represent it according to the needs of the conversa-
tion. The content mappings and visual forms in the design space
offer possibilities for this selection. We aim for the agent to use
forms that help users inspect relationships, compare ideas, or retain
important contributions.
DG2: Coordinate Speech and Canvas Actions within the
Conversational Flow. We aim for Speech and Canvas actions to
make complementary contributions that users can follow as a con-
versation unfolds. In the observational study, participants coordi-
nated boardwork with speech and used pointing to connect their
utterances with visible content. The temporal coordination dimen-
sion helps frame how these channels can unfold together. Our goal
is to coordinate what the agent says with what it makes visible or
refers to, at moments that preserve the flow of conversation.
DG3: Develop Canvas Content as the Conversation Unfolds.
Inspired by how people write and sketch while talking, we aim for
the agent to build on Canvas content as the conversation unfolds.
New contributions and revisions should respond to the evolving
conversation, while preserving a visible record of how the discus-
sion develops.
4.2
System Overview
To realize these goals, we developed VoCa, a voice agent that coor-
dinates speech and Canvas actions in ongoing conversations with
users. Figure 4 presents the system architecture of VoCa. Live Cap-
ture provides visual feedback while the user speaks. The Speech–
Canvas Action Planner produces a spoken Preface and organizes
the subsequent Speech and Canvas actions into Beats and spans.
The Runtime Engine then presents these actions and commits their
results to support subsequent turns.
4.2.1
The VoCa Interface. VoCa’s interface, illustrated in the
teaser (Figure 1), centers on a Canvas. A voice button starts voice in-
teraction and indicates the agent’s current status. Users can choose
between real-time voice, which automatically detects turn endings
and spoken interruptions, and manual voice, in which they con-
trol recording and submission through the button. Both modes use
the same Speech–Canvas planning and presentation mechanisms.
To foreground our investigation of proactive agent actions on the
Canvas, we make the agent the primary Canvas actor (Section 4.3).
Users guide the interaction through speech and interact with the
Canvas itself only by panning, zooming, selecting elements, and
moving whole Visual Objects. Alongside Speech, their current selec-
tion and the Canvas content visible in the current viewport provide
interaction context, allowing the agent to interpret references in
relation to what the user has selected or is viewing. Users cannot
directly create or edit Canvas content or make fine-grained layout
adjustments. A collapsible sidebar lets users start a new Session or
reopen previous Sessions from a history list.
6


Figure 4: How VoCa works. The Speech–Canvas Action Planner uses the current input, System Prompt, and Dynamic Context
to determine coordinated Speech and Canvas actions. A Speech-only Preface takes up the user’s input; Beats then bind Canvas
actions to Speech spans. The Runtime Engine assembles Speech spans for streaming text-to-speech and updates Canvas content,
resolves layout for new Canvas content, renders focus cues, and executes Camera movement. The current user input and
committed Runtime results update Conversation History and the Current Canvas for subsequent turns.
While users speak, Live Capture provides visible input feedback
on the Canvas. It incrementally updates an Input Note with what
they have expressed. After the turn is finalized, the Input Note is
consolidated into a user-attributed Turn Summary for later refer-
ence, without copying the transcript (Figure 4).
4.2.2
Speech–Canvas Action Planner. The Speech–Canvas Ac-
tion Planner receives the current user input alongside a static Sys-
tem Prompt and Dynamic Context (Figure 4). The System Prompt
combines Voice Interaction Principles, optional Role Customization,
Speech–Canvas Action Planning Rules, and a Structured Output Con-
tract and Examples. Dynamic Context supplies the Conversation
History, Current Canvas, and Device Context for the current turn.
The Planner interprets the current input together with the con-
versation history and existing Canvas to determine the contribution
needed in this turn. User requests to change Canvas content are han-
dled through this planning process, with the agent determining the
appropriate actions under its interaction principles and available
Canvas capabilities. Guided by the Speech–Canvas Action Planning
Rules, it coordinates the spoken response with content selected for
visual support. Speech provides a natural conversational response,
while the Canvas externalizes structures, relationships, states, or
concise records that benefit from inspection, comparison, or further
development. Speech can introduce, explain, or refer to this content
without reading it out in full. The agent can develop the current
Canvas through annotations and new visual objects connected to
existing content, allowing its visual contributions to build on the
ongoing conversation (DG3).
The Planner expresses these coordinated decisions as a spoken
Preface followed by Beats containing Speech spans and associated
Canvas actions. The Preface is a brief spoken response that takes
up the user’s input and, when a Visual Object will be created, sig-
nals the upcoming action. It contains no Canvas actions and can
begin playing while the rest of the response is still being generated.
The subsequent response is organized into Beats, each forming a
self-contained spoken unit. Within each Beat, Speech spans may
carry one or more Canvas actions triggered at the onset of the cor-
responding spoken segment (DG2). In the structure below, preface
encodes the Preface, and beats contains the ordered Beats (see
Appendix A for a concrete example):
{
preface: Speech_0,
beats: [
{ spans: [
{ canvas: [CanvasAction_1], speech: Speech_1 },
{ speech: Speech_2 },
{ canvas: [CanvasAction_2, CanvasAction_3], speech: Speech_3 }
] },
{ spans: [
{ speech: Speech_4 },
{ canvas: [CanvasAction_4], speech: Speech_5 }
] },
{ spans: [
{ canvas: [CanvasAction_5, ...], speech: Speech_6 }
] },
...
] }
The Runtime Engine receives this output, assembles Speech spans
for streaming text-to-speech, updates Canvas content, resolves lay-
out for new content, renders focus cues, executes Camera move-
ment, and commits completed results. Section 4.5 describes this
execution path in more detail.
7


4.3
Canvas Actions
Through the Canvas, VoCa creates Visual Objects, annotates ex-
isting content, and guides users’ attention as it creates, annotates,
or refers to Canvas content. It coordinates each action with what
it says. To retain a visible record as the conversation develops, the
agent expresses revisions through Annotations or new content,
preserving committed contributions rather than overwriting or
deleting them (DG3). Figure 5 summarizes these three forms of
Canvas action together with Live Capture.
4.3.1
Creating Visual Objects. To complement transient speech,
VoCa selects among three types of Visual Object according to what
should remain inspectable or open to further construction (DG1;
Figure 5, panel 1):
• Note. A Note preserves a conversational contribution as a
bounded piece of text when its wording or textual organiza-
tion matters—for example, a definition, draft passage, outline,
decision, or working list. It keeps this content visible as a
shared textual artifact that participants can revisit or build
on across turns. Specific text ranges remain addressable, al-
lowing the agent to attach Annotations or direct Attention
to particular wording while Speech introduces or discusses
it.
• Visual Representation. When understanding depends on
inspecting several parts and their relationships at once, a
Visual Representation spatially externalizes a bounded un-
derstanding through visual structure, such as grouping, hi-
erarchy, sequence, comparison, or explicit relationships, and
leaves stable internal targets for later reference.
• Discussion Frame. When an organization has been estab-
lished but its contents remain open to contribution, com-
parison, selection, or revision, a Discussion Frame provides
stable, named places where contributions can be added, com-
pared, and revisited across turns. Region partitions, Grids,
Ordered axes, and Orthogonal planes organize these places,
while target-dependent judgments or status are added as
Annotations.
Incremental layout. New Visual Objects are placed incremen-
tally according to their source relationships with existing Canvas
content. Each object’s primary source guides its local placement.
References to internal elements favor nearby positions outside the
source object, while whole-object references follow the display’s
preferred growth direction. Internal-element references produce
visible connections; whole-object relationships are retained without
a line. Objects without a source continue near the most recently
added object. New placements use available space without rear-
ranging existing objects, making visible how contributions build
on earlier content (DG3).
Figure 6 schematically illustrates possible spatial arrangements
that can arise as related objects are added over time: contributions
around a Discussion Frame, a sequence with parallel branches, and
interconnected clusters extending from earlier content.
4.3.2
Annotating Existing Canvas Content. When new material
derives its meaning from existing Canvas content, VoCa adds it
as an Annotation rather than a new Visual Object. An Annotation
either attaches to a target as a Comment, Badge, or Visual Mark, or
enters an established Discussion Frame location as a Frame Entry.
By tying new explanations, judgments, or contributions to existing
content, these additions let the agent develop what has already
been established across turns (DG3). They remain available for later
reference (Table 1).
Table 1: Persistent Annotation forms and their roles in VoCa.
Form
When used
Canvas result
Comment
Explanation, rationale, or
question depends on a
target.
Target-linked text with a
lightweight leader.
Badge
Status or expressive cue
should be recognizable at
a glance.
Icon, number, or emoji on
target.
Visual Mark
Existing content needs
emphasis or a visible
revision state.
Highlight, underline,
circle, or strike on target.
Frame Entry
Contribution belongs in
an established Frame
location.
Compact text in a region,
cell, axis, or plane
position.
Comments, Badges, and Visual Marks can apply to an entire
Visual Object, an internal element, a Frame region or Entry, or a
specific text range within a Note; Frame Entries instead occupy es-
tablished Frame locations. Material that should stand on its own or
establish a new organization becomes a new Visual Object. Panel 2
of Figure 5 illustrates these forms on existing Canvas content.
4.3.3
Attention Guidance. Attention Guidance helps users connect
spoken references with the corresponding visible content (DG2).
When a target involved in the current Speech falls outside the read-
able viewport, the Camera pans or zooms to keep its owning Visual
Object fully visible. For an explicit reference, a temporary focus
cue marks the referenced Visual Object, internal element, Frame
location or Entry, or specific text range within a Note. The cue
remains only for the corresponding Speech and then fades, leav-
ing committed Canvas content and geometry unchanged (Figure 5,
panel 3).
User selection communicates “I mean this” and becomes context
for the agent’s subsequent response; the agent’s focus cue com-
municates “this is what I am referring to.” The Camera remains
still when the target is already readable. User-initiated panning or
zooming temporarily pauses automatic Camera following, allowing
users to inspect the Canvas without competing movement.
4.4
Usage Scenario
Figure 7 follows Xiaolin, a graduate student, as she develops a thesis
proposal with VoCa across six moments. As the research direction
narrows from broad interests to a concrete study, the agent creates,
extends, annotates, and revisits Canvas content. The same Canvas
remains available when Xiaolin continues on her phone.
(a) Framing interests and constraints. Xiaolin wants to develop
a research direction around digital health, habit formation, and
social connection within three months, preferably with university
students. As she speaks, Live Capture reflects these key terms in an
8


Figure 5: Canvas actions and Live Capture in VoCa. (1) Creating Visual Objects includes Notes, Visual Representations, and
Discussion Frames. (2) Annotation adds persistent Comments, Badges, Visual Marks, and Frame Entries to existing content. (3)
Attention Guidance uses temporary focus cues to point to current referents. (4) Live Capture incrementally updates an Input
Note during speech and consolidates it into a user-attributed Turn Summary after the turn.
Figure 6: Illustrative spatial arrangements that can arise
through incremental placement: (a) Frame-centered expan-
sion, (b) flow with branches, and (c) interconnected clusters.
Positions and sizes are schematic.
Input Note. The agent then creates a Research Direction Frame, adds
the three interests and project constraints as Frame Entries, and
uses them to suggest promising connections and a feasible scope
(Figure 7, panel (a)).
(b) Tracing a feedback loop. Xiaolin chooses to explore how habit
formation and social connection might relate. The agent marks the
corresponding Frame Entries and constructs a feedback loop from
a habit attempt, through social feedback and perceived support or
accountability, to the next attempt. Additional Annotations pre-
serve both the promise of encouragement and the risk of pressure
(Figure 7, panel (b)).
(c) Unpacking social feedback design. When Xiaolin asks what
“social feedback design” means, the agent uses a focus cue to point
to the social-feedback node and creates a nearby Note. The Note
explains that feedback can recognize progress, prompt reflection,
and create accountability; a Comment preserves the central tension
of offering support without pressure or loss of autonomy (Figure 7,
panel (c)).
(d) Expanding design opportunities. Xiaolin next asks what
concrete questions she could study through large language model
social agents. Drawing on the feedback loop and Note, the agent
creates a Visual Representation of four opportunity areas: role
and persona, feedback function, intervention timing, and basis for
adaptation. Brief Annotations make the question within each area
available for further discussion (Figure 7, panel (d)).
(e) Choosing a persona direction. Xiaolin decides to study how
different social-agent personas support habit formation. The agent
marks the selected opportunity, adds it to the Research Direction
Frame as a Frame Entry, and attaches a Comment preserving three
open questions: how to distinguish the personas, which support
mechanism to examine, and which feedback features to hold con-
stant (Figure 7, panel (e)).
9


Figure 7: Six moments from a multi-turn discussion with VoCa. Xiaolin and the agent move from framing three interests and
project constraints, through tracing a social-feedback loop and comparing research opportunities, to selecting a persona-based
direction and turning it into a proposal. Panels (a)–(f) proceed from top left to bottom right; in panel (f), Xiaolin continues the
same Canvas on her phone.
(f) Finalizing a study across devices. After further turns set out
a Research Design Frame and two proposal drafts, Xiaolin continues
the same Canvas on her phone and asks VoCa to finalize the pro-
posal while adding a qualitative component. The agent adds exit
interviews to the Research Design Frame and creates a Final Pro-
posal Note: a three-week between-subjects deployment comparing
supportive-peer and goal-oriented-coach personas while holding
feedback function and intervention timing constant. The earlier
Proposal v1 and Proposal v2 Notes remain available for comparison
(Figure 7, panel (f)).
4.5
System Implementation
We implemented VoCa as a web application. The frontend and
backend share Zod schemas for Planner output and Canvas state,
keeping model-produced actions and Runtime operations within
the same contract. The backend persists the Conversation, Visual
Objects, and geometry for each Session, so desktop and mobile
devices load the same Canvas and adapt only viewport and Camera.
A Web App Manifest also allows installation as a progressive web
Table 2: Models used in the VoCa prototype.
Function
Model
Real-time voice (turn
detection, transcript,
interruption)
Qwen-Audio 3.0 Realtime Flash
Streaming
transcrip-
tion
(Live
Capture,
manual voice)
Qwen3-ASR-Flash-Realtime
Live Capture
DeepSeek V4 Flash (thinking disabled; tempera-
ture 0)
Planner
GPT-5.6 (reasoning disabled; temperature 0)
Speech synthesis
Qwen-Audio 3.0 TTS Flash (word-level times-
tamps)
app. Model calls, speech recognition, and speech synthesis use the
models in Table 2.
Dynamic Context. Conversation History contains the utter-
ances that were actually spoken and short records of Canvas
10


changes that executed successfully, so that later references can be
resolved. Current Canvas is given to the Planner as text rather
than a screenshot: for each Visual Object, its identifier, content or
summary, source relations, Annotations, referable parts (such as a
Node or a paragraph), and position and size. The user’s selection
and the device’s Canvas dimensions accompany each turn.
Runtime Execution. The Runtime Engine handles the Plan-
ner’s streamed output one Beat at a time. Each complete Beat is
validated for structure, references, and dependencies before any-
thing in it is played or executed. Its Speech spans are joined in
order into one utterance and synthesized by Qwen TTS. Canvas
actions remain attached to the character positions of the Speech
spans they support; word-level timestamps from TTS map those
positions to playback cues. When a cue fires, the Runtime waits
until the action’s targets are rendered, then executes it. On interrup-
tion, the Runtime stops playback and cancels remaining execution,
retaining what has already been spoken and executed. If the model
returns blank output or is unavailable before producing any con-
tent, the Runtime retries once; otherwise the turn ends and the user
can resubmit. Deployment latency and failure rates are reported in
Section 6.1.
Canvas Rendering. Each Visual Object has a specialized ren-
derer. Notes use Markdown; images and raw HTML are not ren-
dered. Visual Representations use restricted Mermaid flowcharts:
Mermaid computes the layout, and the Runtime sanitizes the SVG
and exposes stable internal targets, so that later actions can refer
to individual parts of a diagram. Discussion Frames use a typed
structure that the Runtime compiles into a fixed scaffold, placing
each Entry at the Frame location the Planner specifies.
5
User Study
We conducted an exploratory five-day deployment study to examine
VoCa in everyday use. Participants could use VoCa for their own
purposes across multiple devices, allowing us to learn from their
experiences and their expectations for using it in daily life. The
study addressed three research questions:
RQ1. How do participants assess VoCa’s overall usability, and
how do they experience its speech–Canvas interaction?
RQ2. What do participants use VoCa for, and in what ways do
they engage in speech–Canvas interaction with it?
RQ3. Based on their deployment experience, what improvements
do participants want from VoCa?
5.1
Participants and Procedure
We recruited 19 participants through social media and snowball
sampling. All participants used LLM-based tools in their every-
day activities and had experience with voice interaction. Before
enrolling, they were informed that the study required using VoCa
on each of five consecutive days. One participant (P13) was ex-
cluded from the analysis for not meeting this requirement, leaving
18 participants in the final analysis (10 women and 8 men, aged
21–28 years; M = 22.61, SD = 1.97). Participants were university
students or recent graduates from various disciplines, including
design, computer science, physics, and mathematics. They were
native Chinese speakers and used VoCa in Chinese. All participants
provided informed consent. Compensation was RMB 100 per par-
ticipant. The study was approved by our institution’s ethics review
process.
Before deployment, participants completed a questionnaire on
demographics and prior AI and voice-interaction experience, fol-
lowed by a brief orientation with guided practice using VoCa. The
orientation included a demonstration video and an introduction to
VoCa’s basic functions and usage. We deployed an online version
of VoCa and gave each participant an individual account, which
they could use to log in on different devices. We asked participants
to use VoCa on multiple devices where possible, and showed them
how to add it to a phone’s home screen as a progressive web app.
Real-time voice was enabled by default; participants could switch
to manual voice according to their needs.
During the deployment, participants used VoCa freely each day
and were asked to converse over as many turns as possible and
to end each conversation by selecting Finish discussion and sub-
mitting a brief Session Reflection. The system did not enforce this
step. Participants could contact us with any questions during the
deployment. At the end of the deployment, they completed a ques-
tionnaire and an individual semi-structured interview, which was
audio-recorded.
5.2
Data Collection and Analysis
We collected a post-deployment questionnaire, interviews, Session
Reflections, and interaction logs. Study data were stored on a server
controlled by the research team.
Questionnaire. The post-deployment questionnaire comprised
the System Usability Scale (SUS) [6], which gave a standardized over-
all assessment of usability, and two sets of six study-specific items.
The voice-interaction items described basic voice performance, in-
cluding understanding, memory across turns, response relevance,
waiting, turn-taking cues, and repair. The speech–Canvas items
asked how speech and Canvas changes related, complemented each
other, and remained easy to follow as content grew (Appendix C).
For RQ1, we scored SUS and analyzed the study-specific items in-
dividually using descriptive statistics and response distributions.
These results also provided context for interpreting the qualitative
findings.
Interviews and Session Reflections. The approximately 30-
minute semi-structured interviews asked about prior voice-agent
use, experiences with VoCa, perceived differences from other voice
agents, unmet expectations, and desired improvements (Appen-
dix D). Session Reflections were submitted in VoCa and stored
with their Sessions; each comprised a five-point overall experi-
ence rating and one open response to three prompts: whether the
Session helped with the participant’s topic, one of four rotating
prompts, and an invitation for further comments (Appendix C.1).
These accounts informed RQ1 and RQ3 and supplemented RQ2.
Two researchers independently coded these accounts at the level of
meaningful passages, identifying experiences, use contexts, difficul-
ties, and desired improvements. The researchers compared codes
from both sources within and across participants, discussing differ-
ences and grouping related codes into categories and themes while
retaining negative and conflicting accounts.
11


Interaction logs. These logs contained each Session’s transcript,
final Canvas content, and event history, including user selection
and reference, interruptions, Canvas actions, execution failures, and
timing. These logs mainly informed RQ2 and also supported RQ1.
We analyzed them at two levels. At the Session level, we derived
purpose categories. Full Session transcripts were read and summa-
rized in terms of purposes and changes of direction. Comparing
these summaries across Sessions produced the purpose categories.
For the descriptive use summary, two researchers manually as-
signed applicable purpose categories to every Session, using user
requests in context and, where available, Session-specific reflec-
tions. Each category was counted once per Session and once per
participant; unsuccessful attempts were retained, and Sessions with-
out an identifiable purpose were reported separately. At the episode
level, episodes spanning different purposes were selected for closer
analysis, including ordinary use, breakdowns, and Sessions without
a reflection; Session ratings helped identify contrasting experiences,
such as higher- and lower-rated Sessions from the same participant.
Within these episodes, user requests, agent speech, Canvas actions,
and subsequent responses were traced and compared, and com-
parison across episodes identified the ways of interacting. Session-
specific reflections and identifiable interview accounts were linked
to the corresponding Sessions; broader accounts informed cross-
case interpretation.
6
Findings
Across the five-day deployment, the 18 participants engaged in
251 Sessions, with a median of 15 Sessions per participant (range:
6–21). These Sessions contained 1,307 submitted turns (median
4 per Session, range: 1–20); 1,088 (83.2%) used manual voice and
219 (16.8%) used real-time voice. Of the 251 Sessions, 212 (84.5%)
had three or more turns, 23 had ten or more, and 204 (81.3%) had
a Session Reflection. We first report participants’ assessments of
usability and their experiences of VoCa, followed by what they used
the system for and how they engaged in speech–Canvas interaction
with it. We then describe the improvements participants wanted
from VoCa. Appendix B provides example Canvas snapshots from
the deployment Sessions discussed below.
6.1
Usability and Experiences of Speech–Canvas
Interaction with VoCa (RQ1)
Overall, participants found VoCa easy to use and its speech–Canvas
responses helpful and different from those of existing voice agents,
but their experiences varied with how well VoCa chose what and
how to show, whether speech and Canvas worked together, and
how the Canvas developed. The mean System Usability Scale score
was 76.9 (𝑆𝐷= 10.8), corresponding to “good” usability [5]. Ratings
of the speech–Canvas items were more mixed (Figure 8a). On the
voice-interaction items (Figure 8b), participants generally rated
response relevance, understanding, and waiting time positively;
among completed turns, the median latency from input submission
to logged speech playback onset was 4.42 seconds (IQR: 3.83–5.43
seconds; 𝑛= 836 valid turn-level observations). Ratings of retention
across turns, turn-taking cues, and redirecting after misunderstand-
ings were less consistent. Technical problems also disrupted some
turns: logs explicitly recorded 73 execution failures (5.6% of turns),
involving network or service errors, the model returning empty or
invalid output or timing out, and Canvas operations that could not
be carried out.
6.1.1
How Well Did VoCa Choose What and How to Show?
Participants valued Visual Objects that organized what they
heard for explanation and comparison, making relationships,
sequences, and key points intuitive to see. When asking how
to store different fruits, P03 received a comparison table without
specifying that format: “It can directly list a table, with comparisons
that show the results clearly. It is the first time I have seen a table
drawn on the Canvas.” Others agreed: P05, P11, and P12 found the
Visual Representations clear, P10 found key points easier to grasp
than by listening, and P14 found Visual Objects clearer and more
concise than the long answers of other voice agents.
What VoCa showed did not always fit users’ purposes or
provide the detail they needed. P01 appreciated the grouping
and comparison of musical instruments but noted: “The way it
compared them didn’t quite fit what matters to me when learning an
instrument.” P01 also felt that their reasons and goals for learning
an instrument had not been sufficiently explored. In a technical
explanation, P12 praised the detailed spoken account but found
the words on the diagrams insufficient to understand the subject;
the conversation included repeated requests for more concrete and
accessible explanations. P02 and P18 also described content that
was too general: a large table (Discussion Frame) with only general
text (P02), and explanations that took up space but helped little
(P18).
The form VoCa gave the content was hard to predict and
not always the one participants wanted. P02, P11, and P15 could
not tell how VoCa decided which form to use, and P08 expected a
mind map and P18 a structure diagram of a model, but found a list
of points and mostly text. Forms could also work against reading:
P06 found the Canvas too large for answers given in a few points,
and P12 found that a mind map (Visual Representation) of tourist
attractions “adds to the reading barrier” and wished to choose how
content was shown.
6.1.2
How Did Participants Follow Speech and Canvas
Together? Participants could connect speech with Canvas
changes, but the two did not always complement each other
or let them keep pace. On the speech–Canvas items (Figure 8a),
16 of 18 respondents agreed or strongly agreed that they under-
stood the relationship between speech and Canvas changes, and
12 endorsed the timing of those changes; 11 agreed that the two
complemented each other, and seven that they sometimes struggled
to follow both at once. Highlights helped connect what was said
with what was shown: P02, P05, and P15 valued highlighting of the
parts being explained, although timing sometimes slipped, with
the Canvas lagging behind speech for P06 and running ahead of it
for P19.
What was spoken but never reached the Canvas was gone
once said, and the Canvas sometimes contradicted speech.
P16, who disagreed that speech and Canvas complemented each
other, was frustrated that what the agent said did not appear on
the Canvas, and P01 and P14 could not remember or find it again.
In one of P18’s Sessions, the agent said it would highlight content
in yellow, but the highlight appeared in blue. Even when the two
12


10
5
0
5
10
15
20
Q11  Correspondence
Q12  Complementarity
Q13  Timing
Q14  Clarity as content grows
Q15  Response to guidance
Q16  Following difficulty (−)
10
5
0
5
10
15
20
Q17  Intent understanding
Q18  Context retention
Q19  Response relevance
Q20  Waiting-time acceptance
Q21  Turn-taking clarity
Q22  Misunderstanding recovery
(a) Speech–Canvas experience
(b) Voice interaction
Strongly disagree
Disagree
Uncertain
Agree
Strongly agree
Figure 8: Post-deployment questionnaire responses from 18 participants for (a) speech–Canvas experience and (b) voice
interaction. Segment widths indicate response counts. Disagreement extends left and agreement right; the middle response is
centered on the dashed line. Item numbers follow Appendix C. Each item includes 18 responses. Q16 is negatively worded, so
agreement indicates greater difficulty following both outputs.
corresponded, participants could not always keep pace with speech
or read the relevant Canvas content. The Canvas helped P11 keep
up with fast speech, but P02 noted: “Sometimes it talks quite fast in
long stretches. Even with the Canvas content, it’s still a bit hard to
follow, so I need to look back.” P15 did not know when to interrupt
long replies. Readability also mattered: P19 valued the table format
but reported that showing the whole table left its text too small to
read.
6.1.3
How Did Canvas Content Develop as the Conversation
Unfolded? Existing Canvas content could support further
questions and additions. P11 returned to an earlier menu after
asking about wine, and the agent attached further explanations
to the menu. They described it as “like a topic anchor”, helping
them see earlier content and resume questions about it. P04 found
that mind maps in later turns connected well with the earlier one,
although each turn’s map remained separate.
The agent took up later requests, but the Canvas did not
always develop with them. Ten of 18 respondents agreed or
strongly agreed that the agent adjusted subsequent responses when
guided or corrected. P16 considered asking for changes acceptable,
explaining: “It understands what you want to change, but the result
might not match what you have in mind.” P14 recalled clear sum-
maries and appealing charts for a short-story collection, but when
they requested further analysis of the characters’ relationships, the
responses became repetitive and the charts remained in their initial
form. They reported turning to a search engine to continue the task.
P03 and P19 also reported that the Canvas stopped updating after
the first turn or two.
Participants differed on whether the Canvas remained
clear in Sessions with substantial content. Seven of 18 respon-
dents agreed and six disagreed. While developing a swimming plan,
P15 asked for a tutorial-link column in the existing stage table. The
agent left the tutorials in a separate table and annotated how the
material should be combined, but did not add the requested column
to the stage table. They appreciated the initial plan and annotations,
yet reported that subsequent tables increased their cognitive bur-
den. By contrast, P03 praised a new medication-comparison table
linked to an earlier overview for making the follow-up’s connection
clear.
6.2
How Participants Used VoCa (RQ2)
6.2.1
Purposes of Use. Table 3 summarizes six purposes of use
identified through Session coding. Learning and understanding,
decision-making and planning, and information seeking and
practical help appeared most often, each in Sessions from
at least 15 of the 18 participants. Participants also used VoCa
for emotional support, entertainment and casual conversation, and
creative work. These purposes could overlap within a Session as
participants combined activities or changed direction during the
conversation; 23.9% (60) of Sessions had two or more purposes,
most often information seeking together with learning or planning.
Outside the table, 13.9% (35) of Sessions involved exploring the
system’s capabilities (18 of them alongside a listed purpose), and
3.2% (8) had no identifiable purpose.
6.2.2
Speech–Canvas Interaction in Use. Participants used speech
and the Canvas together in different ways, from how they followed
a single response to how they continued a discussion across breaks.
Participants did not always listen and look at the same
time. P08 described putting their phone aside during a response,
then consulting its visual summary: “I might put my phone aside,
and after it finishes responding, I take a look at the mind map.” They
described listening and looking as staggered, and at times skipped
the speech to go straight to the key points on the Canvas. P09 valued
being able to stop a long-winded reply and turn to the Canvas. For
these participants, the Canvas was less something to follow during
speech than a summary to consult (Section 6.1.2).
Participants asked the agent to write down what they
wanted to keep. While learning Dutch word order, P04 asked
the agent to write down its examples: “My Dutch is poor; I cannot
remember it just from hearing you say it.” The agent created a Note
containing examples and meanings, then added English equivalents
13


Table 3: Purposes of use identified through Session coding, ordered by number of Sessions. Values are percentage (count) of
251 Sessions. Purposes could overlap within a Session. Counts include unsuccessful attempts and Sessions that also involved
system exploration; they describe recorded use, not task success.
Purpose
Description
Sessions
Learning and understanding
Participants asked successive questions on topics such as mathematical proofs, language rules,
philosophical ideas, and AI concepts; some also practiced speaking English or worked through
example problems. The agent often drew concepts and their relations as diagrams, and participants
sometimes selected earlier content when following up.
33.1% (83)
Decision-making and planning
Participants made decisions, for example about gifts, travel, or study, weighing options against their
preferences, budgets, or time, or developed plans such as schedules and task lists. Options and plans
often appeared in Discussion Frames and were updated in later turns; Badges marked
recommendations, cautions, or completed tasks.
33.1% (83)
Information seeking and
practical help
Participants looked up information, for example on weather or products, or sought practical help
with a task at hand, such as finding a Photoshop function or dealing with food sticking to a pan.
Steps, settings, or facts were mostly listed in Notes, and Annotations were often added in later turns.
28.7% (72)
Emotional support
Participants talked through difficulties such as anxiety, rejection, loneliness, or pressures around
study or work, seeking reassurance, help making sense of their feelings, or companionship. Notes
or diagrams set out their situation or ways to cope, and Annotations added advice, in some Sessions
including when to seek professional help.
8.0% (20)
Entertainment and casual
conversation
Participants engaged in activities such as chatting about favorite songs, role-playing with fictional
personas, fortune-telling, and song-elimination games. Discussion Frames often tracked game
rounds, tarot draws, or choices, and Notes held role-play lines and lists.
6.8% (17)
Ideation and creative work
Participants worked on ideas and writing, such as developing product ideas, drafting and revising
emails or stories, or working out how to make music or videos with AI. Written drafts appeared in
Notes, with revised versions added on request, and Discussion Frames laid out workflows, in one
Session dividing music-making between the participant and AI.
6.0% (15)
as Annotations when P04 requested them (Figure 9). Likewise, P02
found the spoken Photoshop guidance too extensive and fast, and
requested a lookup list of functions and menu locations. P01 asked
for a to-do list with a checkbox on the left and a line of text on the
right, and P09 asked the agent to write out an email to a teacher
on the Canvas. P04 and P16 also asked for spoken content missing
from the Canvas to be added.
Participants also read what was on the Canvas and built
further questions and additions on it. In 37 Sessions from 14
participants, a turn was submitted while an object on the Canvas
was selected. In a philosophy discussion, P16 asked what two ar-
rows pointing toward existentialism meant in an earlier Visual
Representation, and the agent explained the relationships through
speech and added an Annotation to the diagram (Figure 10). P02 had
the agent mark unbought items on a Note of dormitory supplies,
then asked which small items could be stored together. Similarly,
P04 referred to entries in an album timeline to identify errors and
omissions and requested revisions.
This use of existing material also extended across breaks
in the conversation. P05, who had dictated a task list intending
to keep the Session open for several days, returned about 35 hours
later to report two completed tasks, and the agent added completion
Badges to the original entries (Figure 11). P10 came back three
hours later to ask about side dishes for a meal discussed earlier,
and the agent annotated the earlier Note. This did not always work:
P16 returned after about eight hours to have a music workflow
reordered, but the response was interrupted and the Frame stayed
unchanged.
6.3
Desired Improvements for VoCa (RQ3)
Participants wanted to better understand and steer how the con-
versation with VoCa unfolded, and to connect it with their own
materials and with later work.
6.3.1
Knowing What VoCa Can and Will Do. With the agent
leading what appeared on the Canvas, participants wanted
to know more about what VoCa could do and how they could
take part. P05 wanted the Canvas to introduce VoCa’s functions
when asked, and P15 wanted clearer indications of whether and
how they could adjust what it produced. P03 wanted to circle part
of the Canvas to ask about it, not knowing that selecting an object
already allowed this.
Participants also wanted the agent to be open about what
it could not do and about failures. P09 wanted it to say truthfully
what it could do, after it first claimed it could do anything, and
P17 tried eight times to have it draw a circuit board without being
told that this was beyond its abilities. P02 wanted clearer messages
when Canvas generation failed or a response came back empty, and
P14 wanted to correct misrecognized input text.
Participants also wanted capabilities of the underlying
model that the prototype did not provide. Seven participants
noted that the agent could not search the web for current informa-
tion, and P02, P04, and P07 asked for this. P12 wanted help with
14


complex questions that required longer reasoning, which some-
times produced no output.
6.3.2
More Flexible Ways to Modify Canvas Content. Requests
for direct Canvas interaction ranged from rearranging ex-
isting content to adding users’ own writing and drawings.
The prototype did not support direct editing or fine-grained layout
adjustment by users. Twelve of the 18 participants nevertheless
wanted to do so, for example to move overlapping text or to edit
or delete the agent’s content. After encountering overlapping in-
formation, P12 commented: “I’d like to drag the overlapping content
apart myself.” P10 went further, proposing that users could write,
draw, or modify content on the Canvas and that the agent could
recognize these contributions and respond to them.
For revisions made through speech, participants expected
the agent to modify the Canvas content already in use. P18
wanted to add branches within an existing process diagram through
spoken requests, explaining that a separate, connected diagram did
not incorporate the branches into the original flow. P04 and P12 like-
wise wanted later changes made on the original mind map rather
than in separate maps or added notes (Section 6.1.3), P16 wanted
local edits rather than regenerating content, which introduced er-
rors, and P05 wanted to delete an earlier flowchart version once a
clearer one was generated. At the same time, P18 valued the visible
strike-throughs left when a timetable was revised. The amount of
manual correction mattered too: P03 did not want to fix numerous
mathematical errors by hand.
6.3.3
Adapting VoCa to Users’ Goals and Pace. What participants
expected from the agent depended on what they were trying
to do. When planning a schedule, P01 wanted the agent to ask
about their fixed commitments after outlining the plan’s sections.
They had sought help thinking through the plan and did not know
how to continue when the agent stopped at the outline. P07 and
P15 likewise wanted the agent to ask about missing information
before proceeding. In a Session Reflection, P15 was dissatisfied with
the agent treating emotional remarks as problems to solve and
explained: “I hope it can tell whether I just want to chat and explore
ideas or I’m really trying to get something done.”
Participants also asked for ways to adjust how content
appeared and how they took part in the conversation. P01
sometimes had a diagram or table in mind but did not usually
specify that form when making a request, and suggested templates
as a way to express this preference. They also acknowledged that a
different form chosen by the agent could be reasonable. P15 likewise
wanted to choose from templates, such as a study-plan format that
could be copied into a document. Other requests concerned the
pace of the conversation. P03 wanted Canvas content to appear
gradually alongside the spoken explanation, rather than all at once.
P19 wanted the key points of long spoken replies written down
so that they would not lose track of their own questions, and P06
and P08 preferred manual voice. For P02, having time to formulate
a response mattered: they asked to retain manual control over
starting and ending recording because automatic input left too little
time to think in that situation.
6.3.4
Using Images, Documents, and More Visual Forms with VoCa.
Participants wanted to share their own images and docu-
ments with the agent and to see more kinds of visuals on the
Canvas. P02, P05, and P14 wanted to upload images or files for the
agent to work with, which P02 valued more than image generation.
P03, P06, P09, and P11 wanted images on the Canvas, such as a
textbook-like illustration in place of a flowchart-like diagram, and
P18 wanted Canvas elements themselves to move and change, such
as data passing through a model.
6.3.5
Using Content from VoCa in Subsequent Activities. Beyond
the conversation itself, participants saw potential uses for
VoCa’s content in further design work and everyday activi-
ties. Some wanted to continue the work in another tool. P07 hoped
to take a poster plan into Figma to continue designing and make
precise adjustments. P05 wanted to organize ideas with VoCa and
then pass the content to a coding agent to carry out the work. For
P08, the desired outcome was a list to save or print and keep on
the desk: “But I need something I can actually use,” they explained.
These wishes continue the requests, made during conversations,
to have the agent write down what participants wanted to keep
(Section 6.2.2).
7
Discussion
7.1
Voice Agents with Generative Visual
Interfaces
Our deployment suggests that a voice agent that generates visual
content as it speaks can help people understand content, express
their needs, and develop ideas with the agent. This value reflects
the practice that motivated VoCa: people talking at a whiteboard
decide as they speak what to write, draw, or point to, and the board
develops with their discussion. Participants valued forms the agent
chose and used visible content to look back and build on across
turns and breaks, in line with prior work in which visuals supported
spoken communication [14, 35]. Our study examines this potential
across open-ended conversations. There, generated visual content
can serve as a medium between the user and the agent that moves
the conversation forward, not bound to the order in which things
were said: it gives users something to question, clarify, or build on,
while speech lets them explain what matters and redirect the agent.
Prior work has used generated visual forms to support human–
AI communication, as in Graphologue, Jelly, and Orality [7, 23,
33]. VoCa offers a concrete exploration of how a voice agent can
coordinate its speech with a generative visual interface: it speaks
while creating, pointing to, annotating, and developing content on
the Canvas. The design challenge is to connect these actions with
the unfolding conversation: visually clear content can still miss
the user’s purpose, and an appropriate explanation can reveal a
need to change what is shown. Our results showed both: forms
the agent chose did not always fit what users needed, and requests
to restructure content in use were not met. These reflect design
choices in VoCa, such as an agent that acts on its own initiative
and appends rather than revises content, and other choices remain
to be explored. Our design space organizes these choices across
expression, actions, timing, and participation; our results illustrate
why they need to be considered together.
15


7.2
Application Opportunities
How participants used VoCa suggests where voice agents with gen-
erative visual interfaces could help: in learning, work, and daily life.
When people learn, an agent could explain a topic using different
visual forms, much like a human teacher. At work, it could act as
a partner with whom people discuss, plan, and make decisions on
a shared Canvas. In daily life, it could help people organize their
thoughts and make plans. Beyond the personal digital devices peo-
ple use daily, such an agent could also take other forms. For example,
a robot could make full use of its screen [24] when communicating
with people, showing and developing content as it speaks. On a
meeting-room whiteboard, the setting introduced in our formative
study, an agent could act as a secretary for people working together,
organizing ideas, decisions, and action items while contributing
summaries or suggestions.
For such uses, a voice agent would also need to fit into the
tools people already use: participants wanted the capabilities they
knew from other AI tools and ways to carry content into their
existing workflows. For example, integrated into platforms such as
Claude Code or Codex, it could let users discuss ideas whenever
and wherever they arise and then pass them to these tools for
implementation.
7.3
Design Implications
We propose four design considerations for voice agents that coordi-
nate speech and Canvas actions, grounded in our design exploration
and user study.
7.3.1
Combine Agent Assistance with User Contributions. Users
should be able to contribute directly to the Canvas while
retaining the agent’s initiative in developing content. VoCa
left Canvas work to the agent, with users selecting, navigating,
and moving whole objects (D4), yet users also wanted to write,
draw, and edit. Designers could allow these contributions to guide
the agent’s subsequent speech and Canvas actions. For example,
a user might sketch an initial idea, which the agent could build
on by suggesting additions and developing the proposal through
conversation.
7.3.2
Adapt Speech and Canvas Actions to Conversational Inten-
tions. An agent should adapt how it uses the Canvas to what
the user is trying to do, rather than using it the same way in
every conversation. Users’ expectations differed between explor-
ing ideas and working toward a result, so the agent should judge
this intention from the conversation as a whole. For a result, such
as a plan, it might ask about constraints and extend a visible plan;
for open-ended talk, it might explore an idea through questions
without creating new Canvas content. When the user’s intentions
are unclear, the agent could clarify them before deciding how to
respond, or propose a Canvas action for the user to accept instead
of acting on its own initiative (D6).
7.3.3
Decide What to Say, What to Show, and When. Agents
should coordinate how much they say, what they leave
visible, and the pace at which they introduce both, adjusting
them as the conversation unfolds. Designing multimodal
responses involves selecting forms of expression and coordinating
their timing [14, 37]; our design space treats these as content (D1)
and temporal coordination (D5), but an agent should choose them
together. Like a person at a whiteboard, it could judge what to
write down and when to slow down from signals such as gaze (D4)
that show whether the user is keeping up; VoCa used no such
signals, and some users struggled to follow speech and Canvas at
once. For example, an agent could keep an example and its key
terms visible while explaining their relationships in shorter spoken
segments.
7.3.4
Distinguish Adding Information from Revising Existing Con-
tent. Canvas changes should match whether a request extends
the record of the conversation or revises the material in use.
Our design space distinguishes appending, revising, and version-
ing content (D2). Revising in place suits a structure users are still
working with, such as a table that needs another column, whereas
appending or keeping versions with revision marks suits content
whose development users want to follow.
8
Limitations and Future Work
8.1
Limitations
Our findings should be read in light of three limitations. First, the
version of VoCa evaluated in this study represents one way of
designing speech–Canvas interaction: the agent was the principal
Canvas actor, revisions were expressed through additions and Anno-
tations, and users did not directly edit content or make fine-grained
layout adjustments. We therefore cannot separate whether partici-
pants’ requests to edit and add to Canvas content arose from these
limits, from expectations formed with manipulable visual interfaces,
or from their own need to express ideas visually. Although VoCa
was designed for real-time conversation, its speech and Canvas ac-
tions came with noticeable latency: speech began a median of 4.42
seconds after input [39]. Participants’ experiences may also have
been influenced by the prototype’s current visual repertoire and
occasional issues with generation, speech recognition, readability,
and recovery.
Second, the sample was small and consisted of university stu-
dents or recent graduates, and people with other backgrounds may
use such agents differently.
Finally, the study was a five-day deployment rather than a con-
trolled comparison, which limits what its data can show. The find-
ings therefore do not identify the effects of individual design choices
or comparative advantages over speech-only agents. The interac-
tion logs captured speech and Canvas actions but not gaze or com-
prehension, so they cannot show in detail how the Canvas shaped
the conversation. Accordingly, we use these data to inform design
rather than make causal claims.
8.2
Future Work
Future work could address these limitations. Future versions of
VoCa could let users edit and arrange Canvas content directly, and
studying how people use this control could show whether partici-
pants’ requests arose from VoCa’s limits or from their own need to
express ideas visually. They could also reduce latency and broaden
the visual forms available to the agent. Larger and more varied
samples could show how people beyond university students use
such agents. Finally, controlled studies could compare VoCa with
16


speech-only agents and vary individual design choices, and longer
deployments could show how use develops over time. Combining
eye tracking with time-aligned action logs could show when users
look at referenced content or return to earlier parts of the Canvas,
while retrospective interviews and comprehension measures would
help interpret how the Canvas shapes the conversation.
9
Conclusion
This work explored the value of speech–canvas interaction between
people and voice agents. Through a formative study, we developed
a design space and informed the design of VoCa, a voice agent that
coordinates speech and canvas actions. Our exploratory deployment
illustrated how participants used this interaction in learning, work,
and daily life. Their experiences suggest that a voice agent that
generates visual content as it speaks can help people understand
content, express their needs, and develop ideas with it. Realizing
this value requires content in forms suited to the conversation,
speech and canvas actions that users can follow and influence, and
content that develops as the conversation unfolds. Together, these
contributions inform the design of voice agents with generative
visual interfaces.
References
[1] Shaaron Ainsworth. 2006. DeFT: A Conceptual Framework for Considering
Learning with Multiple Representations. Learning and Instruction 16, 3 (2006),
183–198. doi:10.1016/j.learninstruc.2006.03.001
[2] Rifat Mehreen Amin, Alperen Adatepe, Daniela Fernandes, Daniel Buschek,
and Andreas Butz. 2026. Conversations in Space: Structuring Non-Linear LLM
Interactions on a Canvas. arXiv:2605.15848 [cs.HC] doi:10.48550/arXiv.2605.15848
[3] Tawfiq Ammari, Jofish Kaye, Janice Y. Tsai, and Frank Bentley. 2019. Music,
Search, and IoT: How People (Really) Use Voice Assistants. ACM Transactions
on Computer-Human Interaction 26, 3, Article 17 (2019), 28 pages. doi:10.1145/
3311956
[4] Mahmoud Baghdadi, Dilara Samad-Zada, and Achim Ebert. 2025. Evaluating
Rich Visual Feedback on Head-Up Displays for In-Vehicle Voice Assistants: A
User Study. Multimodal Technologies and Interaction 9, 11, Article 114 (2025).
doi:10.3390/mti9110114
[5] Aaron Bangor, Philip Kortum, and James Miller. 2009. Determining What Indi-
vidual SUS Scores Mean: Adding an Adjective Rating Scale. Journal of Usability
Studies 4, 3 (2009), 114–123.
[6] John Brooke. 1996. SUS: A Quick and Dirty Usability Scale. In Usability Evaluation
in Industry, Patrick W. Jordan, Bruce Thomas, Ian L. McClelland, and Bernard
Weerdmeester (Eds.). Taylor & Francis, London, UK, 189–194.
[7] Yining Cao, Peiling Jiang, and Haijun Xia. 2025. Generative and Malleable User
Interfaces with Generative and Evolving Task-Driven Data Model. In Proceedings
of the 2025 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems. ACM, 1–20.
doi:10.1145/3706598.3713285
[8] Chen Chen, Ella T. Lifset, Yichen Han, Arkajyoti Roy, Michael Hogarth, Alison A.
Moore, Emilia Farcas, and Nadir Weibel. 2023. Screen or No Screen? Lessons
Learnt from a Real-World Deployment Study of Using Voice Assistants With and
Without Touchscreen for Older Adults. In Proceedings of the 25th International
ACM SIGACCESS Conference on Computers and Accessibility. ACM, 1–21. doi:10.
1145/3597638.3608378
[9] Jiaqi Chen, Yanzhe Zhang, Yutong Zhang, Yijia Shao, and Diyi Yang. 2026. Gen-
erative Interfaces for Language Models. In Findings of the Association for Compu-
tational Linguistics: ACL 2026. Association for Computational Linguistics, 1499–
1519. doi:10.18653/v1/2026.findings-acl.74
[10] Adam J. Coscia, Shunan Guo, Eunyee Koh, and Alex Endert. 2025. OnGoal:
Tracking and Visualizing Conversational Goals in Multi-Turn Dialogue with
Large Language Models. In Proceedings of the 38th Annual ACM Symposium on
User Interface Software and Technology. ACM, 1–18. doi:10.1145/3746059.3747746
[11] Pierre Dillenbourg and David Traum. 2006. Sharing Solutions: Persistence and
Grounding in Multimodal Collaborative Problem Solving. The Journal of the
Learning Sciences 15, 1 (2006), 121–151. doi:10.1207/s15327809jls1501_9
[12] Suveen
Ellawela,
Sashenka
Gamage,
and
Dinithi
Dissanayake.
2025.
Proactive
Agentic
Whiteboards:
Enhancing
Diagrammatic
Learning.
arXiv:2512.01234 [cs.HC] doi:10.48550/arXiv.2512.01234
[13] Yate Ge, Yi Dai, Run Shan, Kechun Li, Yuanda Hu, and Xiaohua Sun. 2024. Co-
cobo: Exploring Large Language Models as the Engine for End-User Robot Pro-
gramming. In 2024 IEEE Symposium on Visual Languages and Human-Centric
Computing. IEEE, 89–95. doi:10.1109/VL/HCC60511.2024.00020
[14] Yate Ge, Meiying Li, Xipeng Huang, Yuanda Hu, Qi Wang, Xiaohua Sun, and
Weiwei Guo. 2025. GenComUI: Exploring Generative Visual Aids as Medium
to Support Task-Oriented Human-Robot Communication. In Proceedings of the
2025 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems. ACM, 1–21. doi:10.
1145/3706598.3714238
[15] Darren Gergle, Robert E. Kraut, and Susan R. Fussell. 2013. Using Visual Infor-
mation for Grounding and Awareness in Collaborative Tasks. Human–Computer
Interaction 28, 1 (2013), 1–39. doi:10.1080/07370024.2012.678246
[16] Frederic Gmeiner, John Thompson, George Fitzmaurice, and Justin Matejka.
2026. PointAloud: An Interaction Suite for AI-Supported Pointer-Centric Think-
Aloud Computing. In Proceedings of the 2026 CHI Conference on Human Factors in
Computing Systems. ACM, 1–37. doi:10.1145/3772318.3790797
[17] Hoang Phuoc Ho, Vani Ramesh, Ivo Zaloudek, Delaram Javdani Rikhtehgar,
and Shenghui Wang. 2025. Enhancing Visitor Engagement in Interactive Art
Exhibitions with Visual-Enhanced Conversational Agents. In Proceedings of the
30th International Conference on Intelligent User Interfaces. ACM, 660–671. doi:10.
1145/3708359.3712145
[18] Michael J. Hoefer, Raegan Rychecky, Max Gong, and Stephen Voida. 2025. Tell-
Time: An AI-Augmented Calendar with a Voice Interface for Collecting Time-Use
Data. In Proceedings of the 30th International Conference on Intelligent User Inter-
faces. ACM, 1366–1380. doi:10.1145/3708359.3712116
[19] Jan Hombeck, Henrik Voigt, Jasna Nuhic, Monique Meuschke, and Kai Lawonn.
2026. VocalVis: Bridging Voice-Based Control and 3D Surface Visualization.
Computers & Graphics 138 (2026), 104632. doi:10.1016/j.cag.2026.104632
[20] Zeyuan Huang, Cangjun Gao, Yaxian Shan, Haoxiang Hu, Qingkun Li, Xiaoming
Deng, Cuixia Ma, Yu-Kun Lai, Yong-Jin Liu, Feng Tian, Guozhong Dai, and
Hongan Wang. 2025. SketchGPT: A Sketch-Based Multimodal Interface for
Application-Agnostic LLM Interaction. In Proceedings of the 38th Annual ACM
Symposium on User Interface Software and Technology. ACM, 1–18. doi:10.1145/
3746059.3747598
[21] Khanh Huynh, Jeremy Dillmann, and Sven Mayer. 2025. Spatial Referencing
for Large Language Models in Automotive Navigation Tasks. In Proceedings of
the 24th International Conference on Mobile and Ubiquitous Multimedia. ACM,
146–157. doi:10.1145/3771882.3771917
[22] Donggang Jia, Alexandra Irger, Lonni Besançon, Ondřej Strnad, Deng Luo, Jo-
hanna Björklund, Alexandre Kouyoumdjian, Anders Ynnerman, and Ivan Viola.
2025. VOICE: Visual Oracle for Interaction, Conversation, and Explanation. IEEE
Transactions on Visualization and Computer Graphics 31, 10 (2025), 8828–8845.
doi:10.1109/TVCG.2025.3579956
[23] Peiling Jiang, Jude Rayan, Steven P. Dow, and Haijun Xia. 2023. Graphologue:
Exploring Large Language Model Responses with Interactive Diagrams. In Pro-
ceedings of the 36th Annual ACM Symposium on User Interface Software and
Technology. ACM, 1–20. doi:10.1145/3586183.3606737
[24] Yujin Kim, Christine P. Lee, and Bilge Mutlu. 2026. Speaking with Screens: Design
Space and Guidelines for Informational Robot Screens. In Proceedings of the 21st
ACM/IEEE International Conference on Human-Robot Interaction. ACM, 385–394.
doi:10.1145/3757279.3785557
[25] Johannes Kirmayr, Raphael Paul Wennmacher, Khanh Huynh, Lukas Stappen,
Elisabeth André, and Florian Alt. 2026. “What Are You Doing?”: Effects of In-
termediate Feedback from Agentic LLM In-Car Assistants During Multi-Step
Processing. In Proceedings of the 2026 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Com-
puting Systems. ACM, 1–18. doi:10.1145/3772318.3790997
[26] Felix Kretzer, Kristian Kolthoff, Christian Bartelt, Simone Paolo Ponzetto, and
Alexander Maedche. 2025. Closing the Loop between User Stories and GUI
Prototypes: An LLM-Based Assistant for Cross-Functional Integration in Software
Development. In Proceedings of the 2025 CHI Conference on Human Factors in
Computing Systems. ACM, 1–19. doi:10.1145/3706598.3713932
[27] Chunggi Lee, Tica Lin, Yalong Yang, and Hanspeter Pfister. 2026. Who’s That
Player?: Externalizing Query Interpretation in Spoken XR Sports Interaction.
arXiv:2608.00876 [cs.HC] doi:10.48550/arXiv.2608.00876
[28] Geonsun Lee, Min Xia, Nels Numan, Xun Qian, David Li, Yanhe Chen, Achin
Kulshrestha, Ishan Chatterjee, Yinda Zhang, Dinesh Manocha, David Kim, and
Ruofei Du. 2025. Sensible Agent: A Framework for Unobtrusive Interaction with
Proactive AR Agents. In Proceedings of the 38th Annual ACM Symposium on User
Interface Software and Technology. ACM, 1–22. doi:10.1145/3746059.3747748
[29] Jaewook Lee, Filippo Aleotti, Diego Mazala, Guillermo Garcia-Hernando, Sara
Vicente, Oliver James Johnston, Isabel Kraus-Liang, Jakub Powierza, Donghoon
Shin, Jon E. Froehlich, Gabriel Brostow, and Jessica Van Brummelen. 2025. Imag-
inateAR: AI-Assisted In-Situ Authoring in Augmented Reality. In Proceedings
of the 38th Annual ACM Symposium on User Interface Software and Technology.
ACM, 1–21. doi:10.1145/3746059.3747635
[30] Jimin Lee, Steven-Shine Chen, and Paul Pu Liang. 2025. Interactive Sketchpad:
A Multimodal Tutoring System for Collaborative, Visual Problem-Solving. In
Extended Abstracts of the 2025 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing
17


Systems. ACM, 1–14. doi:10.1145/3706599.3719790
[31] Jaewook Lee, Jun Wang, Elizabeth Brown, Liam Chu, Sebastian S. Rodriguez, and
Jon E. Froehlich. 2024. GazePointAR: A Context-Aware Multimodal Voice Assis-
tant for Pronoun Disambiguation in Wearable Augmented Reality. In Proceedings
of the 2024 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems. ACM, 1–20.
doi:10.1145/3613904.3642230
[32] Ruijia Li and Bo Jiang. 2026. Thinking in Graphs with CoMAP: A Shared Visual
Workspace for Designing Project-Based Learning. In Proceedings of the 2026 CHI
Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems. ACM, 1–25. doi:10.1145/
3772318.3790273
[33] Wengxi Li, Jingze Tian, and Can Liu. 2026. Orality: A Semantic Canvas for
Externalizing and Clarifying Thoughts with Speech. In Proceedings of the 2026
CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems. ACM, 1–29. doi:10.1145/
3772318.3791713
[34] Chao Liu, Mingyang Su, Yan Xiang, Yuru Huang, Yiqian Yang, Kang Zhang, and
Mingming Fan. 2025. Toward Enabling Natural Conversation with Older Adults
via the Design of LLM-Powered Voice Agents that Support Interruptions and
Backchannels. In Proceedings of the 2025 CHI Conference on Human Factors in
Computing Systems. ACM, 1–22. doi:10.1145/3706598.3714228
[35] Xingyu Bruce Liu, Vladimir Kirilyuk, Xiuxiu Yuan, Alex Olwal, Peggy Chi, Xi-
ang Anthony Chen, and Ruofei Du. 2023. Visual Captions: Augmenting Verbal
Communication with On-the-Fly Visuals. In Proceedings of the 2023 CHI Confer-
ence on Human Factors in Computing Systems. ACM, 1–20. doi:10.1145/3544548.
3581566
[36] Ziyi Liu, Yuzhao Chen, Haoyu Ji, Runlin Duan, Zhengzhe Zhu, Xiyun Hu, Kylie
Peppler, and Karthik Ramani. 2026. AmIWrite: Exploring Scalable One-on-One
Handwriting-Based Tutoring for Mathematical Problem-Solving with an LLM-
Powered AI Tutor. In Proceedings of the 2026 CHI Conference on Human Factors in
Computing Systems. ACM, 1–28. doi:10.1145/3772318.3790935
[37] Ke Ma and Jing Cao. 2019. Design Pattern as a Practical Tool for Designing
Adaptive Interactions Connecting Human and Social Robots. In Intelligent Human
Systems Integration 2019 (Advances in Intelligent Systems and Computing, Vol. 903),
Waldemar Karwowski and Tareq Ahram (Eds.). Springer International Publishing,
Cham, 613–617. doi:10.1007/978-3-030-11051-2_93
[38] Amama Mahmood, Junxiang Wang, Bingsheng Yao, Dakuo Wang, and Chien-
Ming Huang. 2025. User Interaction Patterns and Breakdowns in Conversing
with LLM-Powered Voice Assistants. International Journal of Human-Computer
Studies 195 (2025), 103406. doi:10.1016/j.ijhcs.2024.103406
[39] Mykola Maslych, Mohammadreza Katebi, Christopher Lee, Yahya Hmaiti,
Amirpouya Ghasemaghaei, Christian Pumarada, Janneese Palmer, Esteban
Segarra Martinez, Marco Emporio, Warren Snipes, Ryan P. McMahan, and
Joseph J. LaViola, Jr. 2025. Mitigating Response Delays in Free-Form Conversa-
tions with LLM-powered Intelligent Virtual Agents. In Proceedings of the 7th ACM
Conference on Conversational User Interfaces. ACM, 1–15. doi:10.1145/3719160.
3736636
[40] Richard E. Mayer and Roxana Moreno. 2003. Nine Ways to Reduce Cognitive
Load in Multimedia Learning. Educational Psychologist 38, 1 (2003), 43–52. doi:10.
1207/S15326985EP3801_6
[41] Microsoft. 2026. Huabu: Where You and Your Agents Think Together. https:
//github.com/microsoft/Huabu
[42] Jeesun Oh, Nayeong Kim, Yuchun Yan, and Sangsu Lee. 2024. VOICON: Geometric
Motion-Based Visual Feedback in Voice User Interface. In Proceedings of the 2024
ACM Designing Interactive Systems Conference. ACM, 102–115. doi:10.1145/
3643834.3660741
[43] Martin Porcheron, Joel E. Fischer, Stuart Reeves, and Sarah Sharples. 2018. Voice
Interfaces in Everyday Life. In Proceedings of the 2018 CHI Conference on Human
Factors in Computing Systems. ACM, 1–12. doi:10.1145/3173574.3174214
[44] Suraj Prasad and Pinak Mahapatra. 2026.
Speech-Synchronized White-
board Generation via VLM-Driven Structured Drawing Representations.
arXiv:2603.25870 [cs.CV] doi:10.48550/arXiv.2603.25870
[45] Leon Reicherts, Yvonne Rogers, Licia Capra, Ethan Wood, Tu Dinh Duong, and
Neil J. Sebire. 2022. It’s Good to Talk: A Comparison of Using Voice Versus Screen-
Based Interactions for Agent-Assisted Tasks. ACM Transactions on Computer-
Human Interaction 29, 3, Article 25 (2022), 41 pages. doi:10.1145/3484221
[46] Karl Toby Rosenberg, Rubaiat Habib Kazi, Li-Yi Wei, Haijun Xia, and Ken Perlin.
2024. DrawTalking: Building Interactive Worlds by Sketching and Speaking. In
Proceedings of the 37th Annual ACM Symposium on User Interface Software and
Technology. ACM, 1–25. doi:10.1145/3654777.3676334
[47] Mike Scaife and Yvonne Rogers. 1996. External Cognition: How Do Graphical
Representations Work? International Journal of Human-Computer Studies 45, 2
(1996), 185–213. doi:10.1006/ijhc.1996.0048
[48] Leixian Shen, Yizhi Zhang, Haidong Zhang, and Yun Wang. 2024. Data Player:
Automatic Generation of Data Videos with Narration-Animation Interplay. IEEE
Transactions on Visualization and Computer Graphics 30, 1 (2024), 109–119. doi:10.
1109/TVCG.2023.3327197
[49] Weiyan Shi, Dorien Herremans, and Kenny Tsu Wei Choo. 2026. When Drawing
Is Not Enough: Exploring Spontaneous Speech with Sketch for Intent Alignment
in Multimodal LLMs. arXiv:2604.11964 [cs.HC] doi:10.48550/arXiv.2604.11964
[50] Lenja Sorokin, Khanh Huynh, Malin Eiband, Lukas Stappen, and Jeremy Dillmann.
2025. Collaborating with LLMs Through a Voice and Graphical User Interface.
In Adjunct Proceedings of the 27th International Conference on Mobile Human-
Computer Interaction. ACM, 1–8. doi:10.1145/3737821.3749555
[51] Sangho Suh, Meng Chen, Bryan Min, Toby Jia-Jun Li, and Haijun Xia. 2024.
Luminate: Structured Generation and Exploration of Design Space with Large
Language Models for Human–AI Co-Creation. In Proceedings of the 2024 CHI
Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems. ACM, 1–26. doi:10.1145/
3613904.3642400
[52] Sangho Suh, Bryan Min, Srishti Palani, and Haijun Xia. 2023. Sensecape: En-
abling Multilevel Exploration and Sensemaking with Large Language Models. In
Proceedings of the 36th Annual ACM Symposium on User Interface Software and
Technology. ACM, 1–18. doi:10.1145/3586183.3606756
[53] Shirley Tan. 2021. Bansho as Part of Lesson and Lesson Study: From the Origins
to the Present. International Journal for Lesson & Learning Studies 10, 4 (2021),
378–392. doi:10.1108/IJLLS-09-2021-0076
[54] Shirley Tan, Stéphane Clivaz, and Masanobu Sakamoto. 2023. Presenting Multiple
Representations at the Chalkboard: Bansho Analysis of a Japanese Mathematics
Classroom. Journal of Education for Teaching 49, 4 (2023), 630–647. doi:10.1080/
02607476.2022.2150538
[55] Shirley Tan, Shiho Nozaki, Hongxue Fu, and Yoshiaki Shibata. 2023. The Principles
of Teacher’s Decision-Making in Japanese Board Writing (Bansho) Process. Asia
Pacific Journal of Education 43, 1 (2023), 236–251. doi:10.1080/02188791.2021.
1924119
[56] Thesys. 2026. LiveKit Generative UI Voice Agent. https://github.com/thesysdev/
voice-agent-generativeui
[57] THU-MAIC. 2026. OpenMAIC: Open Multi-Agent Interactive Classroom. https:
//github.com/THU-MAIC/OpenMAIC
[58] Priyan Vaithilingam, Elena L. Glassman, Jeevana Priya Inala, and Chenglong
Wang. 2024. DynaVis: Dynamically Synthesized UI Widgets for Visualization
Editing. In Proceedings of the 2024 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing
Systems. ACM, 1–17. doi:10.1145/3613904.3642639
[59] Hans G. W. van Dam. 2025. A Multimodal GUI Architecture for Interfacing with
LLM-Based Conversational Assistants. arXiv:2510.06223 [cs.HC] doi:10.48550/
arXiv.2510.06223
[60] Bandhav Veluri, Benjamin N. Peloquin, Bokai Yu, Hongyu Gong, and Shyam-
nath Gollakota. 2024. Beyond Turn-Based Interfaces: Synchronous LLMs as
Full-Duplex Dialogue Agents. In Proceedings of the 2024 Conference on Empir-
ical Methods in Natural Language Processing. Association for Computational
Linguistics, 21390–21402. doi:10.18653/v1/2024.emnlp-main.1192
[61] Minh Duc Vu, Han Wang, Jieshan Chen, Zhuang Li, Shengdong Zhao, Zhen-
chang Xing, and Chunyang Chen. 2024. GPTVoiceTasker: Advancing Multi-Step
Mobile Task Efficiency Through Dynamic Interface Exploration and Learning. In
Proceedings of the 37th Annual ACM Symposium on User Interface Software and
Technology. ACM, 1–17. doi:10.1145/3654777.3676356
[62] Shu Zhong, Elia Gatti, James Hardwick, Miriam Ribul, Youngjun Cho, and Mar-
ianna Obrist. 2025. LLM-Mediated Domain-Specific Voice Agents: The Case
of TextileBot. Behaviour & Information Technology (2025), 1–33. doi:10.1080/
0144929X.2025.2456667
A
Example Speech–Canvas Action Planner
Output
The following illustrative example shows one possible abbrevi-
ated Planner output. Consider a user who asks, “How might social
feedback affect repeated habit attempts, and where could I focus
a study?” The Canvas is initially empty, so the example creates a
Visual Representation without links to earlier objects.
Speech explains the possible relationship and proposes a direc-
tion for inquiry. The Representation makes the sequence available
for inspection, while a Comment preserves the proposed interven-
tion point on the feedback element. Temporary Attention Guidance
connects the spoken reference to that element. The next Beat reuses
the same element as Speech develops the study question, illustrat-
ing how visible content can support subsequent speech without
being recreated.
The preface field contains Speech only. The first Beat creates
the Representation, then attaches Attention Guidance and Annota-
tion to the same Speech span. Later Beats are omitted. The example
18


illustrates content coordination and serialization; it is not an ob-
served study episode or a required response template.
{
preface:
"Let's map that relationship first, then narrow the study
question.",
beats: [
{ spans: [
{ canvas: [{
type: "representation.create",
id: "habit-feedback-loop",
title: "Habit and Social Feedback Loop",
sources: [],
source: "flowchart LR\nattempt[\"Habit attempt\"] -->
feedback[\"Social feedback\"]\nfeedback --> next[\"Next
attempt\"]"
}],
speech:
"A habit attempt can elicit social feedback, which may
shape the next attempt." },
{ canvas: [
{
type: "attention.show",
targets: [{
objectId: "habit-feedback-loop",
targetId: "feedback"
}]
},
{
type: "annotation.add",
id: "potential-intervention",
target: {
objectId: "habit-feedback-loop",
targetId: "feedback"
},
comment: "Potential intervention point"
}
],
speech:
"The feedback step is a promising intervention point." }
] },
{ spans: [
{ canvas: [{
type: "attention.show",
targets: [{
objectId: "habit-feedback-loop",
targetId: "feedback"
}]
}],
speech:
"The key question is what kind of feedback changes the
next attempt." },
{ speech:
"That gives us a focused direction for the study." }
] },
...
]
}
B
Example Canvas Snapshots from Deployment
Sessions
These three examples come from Sessions discussed in Section 6.2.
They retain the original image text and use English captions based
on the interaction logs.
C
Questionnaire Instruments
C.1
Session Reflection
After a substantive deployment Session, participants were invited
to provide an overall experience rating and one combined response
to three open-ended prompts. The English wording used in the
interface was:
(1) Overall experience rating: “Considering only this discussion,
how was your overall experience?” The five response options
were 1 (Poor), 2 (Fair), 3 (Okay), 4 (Good), and 5 (Great).
(2) Fixed opening prompt: “Briefly, did this session help with the
topic you wanted to discuss? What was most helpful or most
difficult?”
(3) Rotating prompt: One of the following four prompts was
selected for each Session and remained the same whenever
its feedback panel was opened:
(a) “Did anything shown on the canvas help you understand
or move the topic forward? Was any content unnecessary
or distracting?”
(b) “As the discussion continued, the system gradually added
and organized content on the canvas. Did that process feel
coherent and build on the earlier discussion? Did anything
feel disconnected, repetitive, or unclear?”
(c) “As the system talked with you while presenting or ad-
justing content on the canvas, did the two feel naturally
coordinated? Was there a moment when the experience
felt abrupt, hard to follow, or out of sync?”
(d) “Was there a moment when you wanted to control the
canvas directly instead of asking the system through
conversation—for example, to edit, move, delete, or add
something yourself? If so, what did you want to do?”
(4) Fixed closing prompt: “Besides that, is there anything else
you would like to share about this session? Any thoughts
about the discussion, voice, canvas, or overall experience are
welcome.”
C.2
Post-Deployment Questionnaire
The post-deployment questionnaire contained three blocks. Agree-
ment items used a five-point scale from strongly disagree to strongly
agree.
C.2.1
System Usability Scale. We administered the standard SUS
items with their original five-point response scale [6]:
(1) I think that I would like to use this system frequently.
(2) I found the system unnecessarily complex.
(3) I thought the system was easy to use.
(4) I think that I would need the support of a technical person
to be able to use this system.
(5) I found the various functions in this system were well inte-
grated.
(6) I thought there was too much inconsistency in this system.
(7) I would imagine that most people would learn to use this
system very quickly.
(8) I found the system very cumbersome to use.
(9) I felt very confident using the system.
(10) I needed to learn a lot of things before I could get going with
this system.
19


Figure 9: P04 requested written Dutch examples and English equivalents; the agent created a Note and added Annotations.
C.2.2
Speech–Canvas Interaction Experience. Participants were
instructed to consider their overall experience across the five-day
deployment:
(11) I could understand the relationship between what VoCa said
and the changes on the Canvas.
(12) VoCa’s speech and Canvas content complemented each
other rather than repeating unnecessarily or conflicting.
(13) The timing of Canvas changes made it easy to relate them
to what I was hearing.
(14) In Sessions with more content, the Canvas remained clear
and easy to use.
(15) When I tried to guide or correct VoCa, the system usually
adjusted its subsequent response as I intended.
(16) At times, I found it difficult to keep up with VoCa’s speech
and Canvas changes at the same time.
C.2.3
Voice-Interaction Diagnostics. Participants were instructed
to consider primarily their experience of speaking with and listen-
ing to VoCa:
(17) VoCa generally understood what I intended to communicate.
(18) Across multiple turns, VoCa usually did not forget important
information I had provided earlier.
(19) VoCa’s spoken responses were usually relevant to my ques-
tion or request at the time.
(20) The waiting time before VoCa began responding was accept-
able.
(21) I could tell when I could speak, wait, or interrupt.
(22) When VoCa misunderstood me, I could redirect the interac-
tion toward my intended direction without much difficulty.
D
Semi-Structured Interview Questions
(1) When do you typically use the voice agents you mentioned
in the pre-study questionnaire? Please describe one repre-
sentative experience.
(2) During the five days, in what situations did you use VoCa,
what were you trying to accomplish, and how was the overall
experience? Which features or forms of interaction did you
like most, which were most helpful, and why?
(3) Compared with the voice agents you had used before, what
differences, if any, did VoCa’s combined Speech and Canvas
responses make to your use? How did they affect what you
were trying to accomplish?
(4) Please describe an occasion when VoCa did not meet your
expectations. What were you trying to accomplish, how did
it respond through Speech and the Canvas, and what did not
meet your expectations?
20


Figure 10: P16 questioned arrows toward existentialism; the agent explained the relationships through speech and annotated
the existing diagram.
Figure 11: P05 returned after approximately 35 hours and re-
ported two completed activities; the agent added completion
Badges to the existing Discussion Frame.
(5) What capabilities would you like VoCa to add, or what ex-
isting features or interactions would you like it to improve?
What problems would these changes address?
21


E
Board Actions and Speech–Board Coordination
Table 4: Board-action types observed in Part 1. Roles describe uses in the discussion, rather than measured effects or exclusive
action–need mappings.
Code
Board action
Description
Role in the discussion
B1
Recording information
Recording selected terms, quantities, or constraints as
standalone content.
Keeping information available for discussion
and later reference.
B2
Establishing a base structure
Drawing a basic figure, scene outline, grid, or structure around
which discussion can develop.
Establishing a reference for objects, concepts,
or spatial relationships.
B3
Adding detail
Adding labels, attributes, explanations, or enlarged detail views
to existing content.
Elaborating structures, rules, or local details.
B4
Relating and grouping
Connecting or arranging elements to express relationships,
sequence, membership, or grouping.
Making relationships and dependencies
explicit.
B5
Emphasizing and marking
status
Highlighting individual or grouped content, or marking priority,
certainty, completion, or another status.
Directing shared attention and marking the
status of ideas or decisions.
B6
Revising content
Correcting, updating, or removing information while largely
retaining its overall organization.
Addressing errors, changed information, or
revised constraints.
B7
Reorganizing and
consolidating
Changing layout, hierarchy, or representation, or gathering
dispersed content into an interim summary.
Reconsidering how ideas fit together and
consolidating emerging outcomes.
B8
Pointing and demonstrating
Pointing, tracing along a diagram, or using bodily actions to
explain board content.
Connecting speech to visible referents and
demonstrating spatial or dynamic information.
B9
Simulating and calculating
Using the board to test assumptions, simulate a process, or
calculate results, including non-numerical simulations.
Examining possible outcomes and the
feasibility of proposals.
Table 5: Speech–board coordination patterns in Part 1, ordered by decreasing session coverage.
Code
Coordination pattern
Speech–board relationship
Session coverage
C1
Synchronous speech and boardwork
Writing or drawing content concurrently with speech about that content.
18/18
C2
Visual updates prompted by questions or
feedback
Adding, modifying, or reorganizing board content in response to a partner’s
spoken question, challenge, or feedback.
17/18
C3
Spoken reference to existing board content
Linking an utterance to a visible referent through deictic expressions
coordinated with pointing.
17/18
C4
Returning to earlier board content in
conversation
Resuming discussion of earlier board content while reviewing it to elaborate,
check, or reassess prior information.
12/18
C5
Visual reorganization accompanying a
discussion-stage transition
Reorganizing board content as talk moves into another stage, such as shifting
from listing constraints to arranging a plan.
10/18
C6
Visual framework first
Drawing a basic framework before a spoken explanation unfolds around it.
6/18
C7
Spoken proposals for board content and
organization
The non-operating partner verbally proposing how content should be drawn,
classified, or arranged on the board.
2/18
C8
Selective or delayed board use
Continuing through speech without drawing, then beginning to draw when
the discussion reaches structurally more complex content.
1/18
C9
Board-supported retelling and confirmation
Using board content to guide a spoken retelling, with the partner checking or
confirming the account.
1/18
22
