Title: Learning When to Commit from Partial Speech for End-to-End Simultaneous Speech Translation

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2610.02612v1

Published Time: Mon, 05 Oct 2026 00:25:13 GMT

Number of Pages: 13

Markdown Content:
# Learning When to Commit from Partial Speech for End-to-End Simultaneous Speech Translation 

Hieu Hoang 

Microsoft 

Amittai Axelrod Abstract 

Simultaneous speech translation must emit use-ful target text before the source is complete while preserving every committed token. We adapt a full-utterance speech language model using prefix supervision derived from its own complete- and partial-waveform translations, requiring neither transcripts nor human trans-lations. We compare single-turn forced-prefix and multi-turn append-only decoding, use a confidence threshold to control the inference-time quality–latency trade-off, and vary the den-sity of training prefixes with a separate synthe-sis margin. On FLEURS and CoVoST 2 in three language directions, prefix training improves quality–latency frontiers over the unadapted model, and confidence provides the broad-est consistently competitive operating range. Multi-turn decoding is generally stronger at low latency; under multi-turn training, commit-calibration error falls by 63–68% overall and 68–80% at early prefixes, whereas single-turn training provides only modest overall calibra-tion gains and no early-prefix improvement. A small synthesis margin sometimes extends the frontier to lower latency, particularly on shorter utterances, while a larger margin de-grades translation quality and calibration. Pre-fix adaptation therefore improves simultaneous speech translation, especially under multi-turn append-only decoding, while synthesis density introduces a non-monotonic quality–latency trade-off. 

1 Introduction 

Simultaneous speech translation begins producing a target-language rendering while the speaker is still talking. The system must therefore act on an evolving acoustic prefix, decide whether the avail-able evidence licenses new target content, and pre-serve everything already shown or spoken. Waiting for the complete utterance maximizes context but incurs sentence-level latency; translating every in-coming block minimizes delay but risks omissions, reordering errors, and unstable output. These decisions are especially consequential for direct speech language models. Unlike a text trans-lation component behind streaming ASR, an end-to-end model receives no explicit word boundary or finalized transcript. Acoustic evidence arrives in time, source words may straddle blocks, and both recognition and translation uncertainty are represented inside one model. Yet modern speech language models are generally optimized for com-plete inputs and ordinary assistant responses, not for repeatedly extending an irrevocable translation from partial audio. Prior work addressed the analogous text problem by making a sentence-trained language model prefix-aware (Hoang et al., 2026). Its central construction uses the model’s own full-input translation as an anchor, derives targets from translations of source prefixes, and replays previously committed target text as a forced prefix. A confidence threshold then lets the model vary its lag dynamically rather than following the same read–write schedule for every sentence. Applying this principle to direct speech is not a direct modality substitution: acoustic inputs form much longer encoded sequences, arrive at model-dictated block boundaries, lack explicit lexi-cal boundaries, and couple recognition and transla-tion uncertainty. Efficient streaming must therefore preserve prior audio computation while represent-ing each commit decision in a causal history of audio blocks, waits, and target emissions. Our starting point during training is a self-teacher speech language model. We ask the model to trans-late complete utterances and fixed-duration pre-fixes of the same waveform. Agreement with the full-audio translation defines how much target text can be supervised for each prefix audio. We fur-ther introduce a synthesis margin that allows the full-audio translation to rescue plausible target to-arXiv:2610.02612v1 [cs.CL] 2 Oct 2026 kens during prefix construction, explicitly control-ling the density of intermediate supervision. This training-time margin is distinct from the inference-time confidence threshold that controls when the trained model emits. The same English audio sup-ports all target languages, and no human translation labels are required to construct the chains. Speech input also exposes a representation choice that is less consequential in the text-prefix setting. Audio inputs are much longer than text inputs, mak-ing reuse of prior computation especially important. In the single-turn forced-prefix decoding protocol, all observed audio precedes an open assistant turn containing the committed target as a forced pre-fix. Subsequent audio blocks are appended to the prompt. Therefore, the KV cache is retained only through the audio boundary; the full committed tar-get must be replayed on a temporary extension be-fore each new delta is generated, after which those target states are discarded. For long sequences, this replay can become computationally expensive, motivating the multi-turn append-only approach. In the multi-turn append-only decoding protocol, each new audio block and target delta is appended to one causal sequence, so all existing key–value states can be reused. We compare how these repre-sentations affect the quality–latency trade-off under the same training and evaluation data. At inference, a confidence threshold compares con-tinuation and stopping evidence using only the ob-served audio and committed target. Sweeping this threshold gives us a quality–latency control, which we compare with fixed wait-k and target-suffix deletion. This work makes four contributions. First, it con-structs target-prefix supervision directly from par-tial waveforms, without transcripts or human trans-lations. Second, it introduces a synthesis mar-gin that controls how readily the full-audio self-translation can extend intermediate targets, provid-ing a controlled intervention on supervision density. Third, it formulates and compares single-turn and multi-turn prompting protocols for streaming audio. Fourth, it shows that prefix adaptation improves quality–latency frontiers under both protocols and is associated with substantially better commit cali-bration under multi-turn decoding. 

2 Related Work 

Simultaneous translation policies. Simultane-ous translation is commonly formulated as a se-quence of read and write decisions. Learned policies use reinforcement learning or su-pervision from oracle actions (Gu et al., 2017; Zheng et al., 2020), while wait-k provides a simple fixed schedule by reading an initial source prefix and then alternating reads and writes (Ma et al., 2019). Fixed policies expose a clear latency knob but cannot adapt their delay to the uncertainty of an individual sentence. Our confidence mechanism instead lets the model decide how much target text to append after the arrival of each audio block, with a threshold controlling the required evidence for commitment. 

Streaming speech translation. Speech transla-tion systems may cascade streaming ASR into text MT or translate speech directly (Bentivogli et al., 2021). Cascades benefit from mature components but expose the translation model to changing recog-nition hypotheses. Direct systems avoid this inter-face, although they must learn acoustic recognition, translation, and scheduling jointly. Streaming trans-ducers explicitly alternate source consumption and target generation (Cho and Esipova, 2016; Huang et al., 2020); retranslation systems repeatedly pro-cess the available prefix with a sentence model (Niehues et al., 2016). We retain the flexibility of prefix retranslation while constraining the tar-get to be append-only, and we apply it directly to waveform prefixes rather than reference or ASR transcripts. 

Output stability and prefix supervision. Re-translation can revise earlier words, producing flicker. Prior work reduces revision through target-suffix deletion (Arivazhagan et al., 2020), forced translation (Polák et al., 2022), or agreement be-tween consecutive hypotheses (Liu et al., 2020). Stable-prefix ideas have therefore primarily served as inference-time commit rules in retranslation sys-tems (Niehues et al., 2016, 2018). Self-training on partial inputs can also make a model more robust to incomplete context (Sen et al., 2023). We use agree-ment with the model’s unconstrained full-audio translation to create training targets and preserve the committed target at inference time, making our approach output stable by construction. Speech language models. Recent work increas-ingly connects speech encoders to general-purpose language models and studies their use in end-to-end speech applications (Yang et al., 2025). Multi-turn speech instruction data (Ouyang et al., 2025; Wang et al., 2025), LLM-oriented simultaneous-translation frameworks (Agostinelli et al., 2024), and interleaved source–target training under latency constraints (Fu et al., 2025) all move toward mod-els that reason and generate across modalities. Our focus is narrower: adapting one offline speech lan-guage model to produce an irrevocable text trans-lation from growing audio, while holding the full-audio self-translation fixed as the supervision an-chor. 

Confidence and calibration. Dynamic commit-ment requires a score whose meaning remains useful across source positions. Neural sequence models can be miscalibrated, including in their end-of-sequence probabilities, and calibration of-ten degrades under distribution shift (Kumar and Sarawagi, 2019; Ovadia et al., 2019). Here, applying a model tuned for complete utter-ances to partial speech introduces such a train– inference mismatch, motivating direct evaluation of commit calibration. Given the next-token distri-bution for streaming context s, let 

pcont = max  

> v / ∈E

p(v | s), pEOS = max  

> e∈E

p(e | s),

(1) where E is the set of end-of-sequence tokens. At each non-final boundary, the deployment rule is 

ρ = pcont − pEOS ,a(ρ; τ ) = 

(

> COMMIT

, ρ ≥ τ, 

> STOP

, ρ < τ. 

(2) 

3 Experimental Setup 

3.1 Task and Languages 

We study direct English-speech-to-text transla-tion in three directions: EN →DE, EN →JA, and EN →ZH. At streaming step i, the system observes waveform prefix a≤ti and an irrevocable target translation prefix ci−1. The system then either waits or appends new output ∆i to the target trans-lation. The visible translation is ci = ci−1 ◦ ∆i.Our LLM’s native audio implementation dictates a fixed 2 s block cadence, so source time advances in 2 s waveform blocks, with a final shorter block when necessary. We call the model-visible context at boundary i the commit-decision context : it com-prises the observed audio, previously committed target, and protocol-specific causal history. Single-turn decoding reconstructs this context from cumu-lative audio and a forced target prefix, whereas multi-turn decoding retains the interleaving se-quence of audio blocks and target deltas. 

3.2 Translation Prefix Synthesis 

Let g denote the offline speech language model, let 

f = g(a) be its translation of the complete utter-ance a, and let hi = g(a≤ti ) be its unconstrained translation of audio prefix i. If ℓi = | lcp( hi, f )|,the supervised commitment at boundary i is 

ci = f1: mi , mi = max  

> j≤i

ℓj . (3) We measure target agreement in words for German and characters for Japanese and Chinese. The run-ning maximum makes the chain monotone even when a later prefix decode is less stable than an ear-lier one. The complete-audio row always supplies 

f . Algorithm 1 in the Appendix gives the complete synthesis procedure. 

3.2.1 Synthesis Margin 

Merging the idea of translation prefix synthesis and confidence-based token selection of Equations 1 and 2, we apply a confidence-based margin to to-ken selection during target-prefix creation. Let r be the next token in the self-teacher’s full-audio trans-lation and x the greedy next token given the current partial-audio prefix. The next synthesis action is 

˜x =

(

r, x = r or p(r) + δ > p (x),

> STOP

, otherwise . (4) We call δ the synthesis margin . The setting δ = 0 

recovers the original prefix algorithm, while in-creasing δ permits the full-audio reference to res-cue a less probable token. This can lengthen prefix supervision at the risk of lower quality translation. 

3.3 Decoding Protocols Single-turn forced-prefix decoding renders each commit-decision context as a single multi-modal user prompt containing a translation instruc-tion and the observed waveform prefix. The com-mitted target is appended as an open assistant pre-fix, and the model is trained to generate only the new continuation (and the closing token). The user prompt indicates the final boundary with an end-of-audio marker. This is analogous to the successful prefix model for text-based simultaneous transla-tion in (Hoang et al., 2026). 

Multi-turn append-only decoding converts cu-mulative commitments c1, . . . , c K into append-only deltas and forms one causal record that al-ternates audio blocks and assistant deltas. Cross-entropy is applied to each target delta (and its clos-ing token). The final sequence includes an end-of-audio marker before its last target delta. Both protocols are flicker-free by construction and permit the prompt and encoded audio prefix to re-main cached. Multi-turn append-only decoding further reduces redundant computation by reusing previous assistant deltas. Appendix D.3 gives the complete prompt templates for both protocols. 

3.4 Model and Training 

The base model and self-teacher are both Qwen2.5-Omni-7B (Xu et al., 2025). LoRA adapters (Hu et al., 2022) are applied to the text decoder with rank 32, scale 64, and dropout 0.05 . Training be-gins from the same base model. Optimization uses AdamW (Kingma and Ba, 2015), a constant learn-ing rate of 5 × 10 −6, and an effective batch size of 64. We retain checkpoints every 500 updates through a maximum of 6,000 updates. Other details of the training recipe can be found in Appendix A. 

Single-turn forced-prefix is trained on two equally sampled tasks, both with an empty com-mitted target: a partial-audio example targeting prefix translation at one retained 2 s boundary, and a full-audio example targeting complete transla-tions. Loss is applied only to the target text and closing token. 

Multi-turn append-only Each full utterance forms one causal record containing all 2 s audio blocks and target deltas in order. An assistant turn with no target text supervises a wait. Loss cov-ers every assistant delta and closing token in one forward pass. 

3.5 Data 

We train on LibriSpeech-100 and LibriSpeech-360 (Panayotov et al., 2015) and Common Voice (Ardila et al., 2020), validate on a mixed set of utterances held out from the training data, and test on FLEURS (Conneau et al., 2022) and CoVoST 2 (Wang et al., 2020). Appendix Table 5 summarizes 

Table 1: Effect of the synthesis margin on the training data, measured by the mean cumulative target-prefix length at each non-final 2 s audio block.                                      

> Language Training dataset δ= 0 δ= 0 .2δ= 0 .5
> EN →DE LibriSpeech-100 10.2 15.9 18.9 LibriSpeech-360 10.2 16.0 18.9 Common Voice 4.2 5.5 6.5 EN →JA LibriSpeech-100 16.7 35.4 46.4 LibriSpeech-360 16.6 35.3 46.1 Common Voice 9.5 13.9 20.5 EN →ZH LibriSpeech-100 14.1 25.5 35.5 LibriSpeech-360 14.1 25.3 35.3 Common Voice 7.4 10.2 13.7

the data. We reserve every 50th training utterance, using the first 400 reserved utterances for mixed validation and the remainder as a holdout. Utter-ance selection and 2 s prefix boundaries are shared across decoding protocols. Common Voice train-ing candidates are decontaminated against CoV-oST 2 by identifier, audio basename, normalized transcript, and audio hash. An analysis of the full-audio found that EN →ZH translations often contained conversational boiler-plate, particularly in the Common Voice subset. For example, a translation of “a lot of money,” might appear as “a lot of money ; if there is any more audio content, you can continue telling me. ”. We conservatively remove trailing clauses that in-vite the user to provide more audio or request further translation help, then truncate every pre-fix translation accordingly while preserving mono-tonicity. This changes 92,039 of 139,684 chains and quarantines eight empty results. Appendix C specifies the rule and reports the cleanup audit. Table 1 confirms that the mean target-prefix length increases monotonically with δ for every language and source corpus when synthesis margins are ap-plied. 

3.6 Validation and Checkpoint Selection Single-turn forced-prefix decoding. Ev-ery checkpoint is first scored on at most 400 utterances from the deterministic one-in-50 LibriSpeech-100 chain holdout. Direct valida-tion computes COMET for stable partial-audio targets and complete-audio translations, and ranks checkpoints by their equal-weight mean. The top two candidates undergo autoregres-sive FLEURS-development rollouts over τ ∈{− 0.8, −0.6, −0.3, 0.0, 0.3, 0.6, 0.8, 0.9, 1.0}. Afull-audio quality gate requires the candidate’s τ =1 .0 COMET to remain within 0.5 of the base self-teacher. Among eligible candidates, mean attainable COMET over a shared latency-budget grid determines the selection; the direct score breaks ties. 

Multi-turn append-only decoding. Controlled validation on the same deterministic holdout evalu-ates productive partial contexts and final contexts with gold causal history. The productive-partial COMET champion and WAIT-balanced-accuracy champion form the shortlist. These candidates then undergo append-only autoregressive development rollouts over the same nine confidence thresholds, and mean attainable COMET over their shared la-tency support determines the selected checkpoint. 

3.7 Inference Mechanisms and Metrics 

All inference mechanisms receive the same se-quence of audio blocks and preserve the previously committed target. The confidence mechanism com-pares the highest non-EOS continuation probability with the EOS probability and emits only when their margin exceeds threshold τ ; sweeping τ traces a model’s quality–latency frontier. We compare it with wait-k and target-suffix deletion (Ma et al., 2019; Arivazhagan et al., 2020). Wait-k suppresses writing for a fixed number of initial 2 s blocks, while suffix deletion withholds a fixed number of trailing target units from each non-final delta. Translation quality is measured with COMET-22-DA (Rei et al., 2022). Latency is measured with Average Lagging in seconds, using audio blocks rather than source-token position, as defined in Appendix A, Equation 5. We evaluate the selected single-turn forced-prefix decoding and multi-turn append-only decoding models on FLEURS primarily, and on CoVoST 2 at the end. We report each complete frontier rather than a single operating point, and include the complete-audio translation as the offline end-point. Commit calibration is evaluated on identical oracle commit-decision contexts for every model using expected calibration error with utterance-cluster bootstrap intervals. The oracle is derived from the base model’s running-max prefix chain so that models are compared on the same continue-versus-stop decisions. 

Table 2: AUC for the base and single-turn models in Figure 1 over each panel’s shared latency interval.                          

> Direction Model wait-ksuf. del. confidence
> FLEURS
> EN →DE base 54.0 54.8 52.2 trained 56.0 57.0 57.0 EN →JA base 75.6 71.6 73.3 trained 76.6 76.3 78.4
> EN →ZH base 41.7 41.7 40.5 trained 43.1 42.9 43.5

4 Results 

4.1 Single-turn Forced-prefix Decoding 

Figure 1 compares the three inference mechanisms on the base and single-turn models, and Ta-ble 2 summarizes every frontier with attainable-envelope AUC, defined in Appendix A, Equation 6. The trained model consistently outperforms the base model across all language directions. Con-fidence margin gives the highest or tied trained-model AUC in all three language directions. It can occasionally be matched by the other mechanisms, but its range exceeds all others. 

4.2 Multi-turn Append-Only Decoding 

Figure 2 and Table 3 compare the three inference mechanisms on the base and multi-turn mod-els. The base model degenerates under multi-turn in-cremental decoding, producing lower-quality trans-lations whose quality can decrease even as more source context becomes available. This pattern is consistent with a train–inference mismatch: the base model was not trained to extend translations across interleaved audio and target turns. The trained model is better by far and, with the con-fidence mechanism, has the best latency range. 

Table 3: AUC for the base and multi-turn models in Figure 2 over each panel’s shared latency interval.                          

> Direction Model wait-ksuf. del. confidence
> FLEURS
> EN →DE base 49.7 48.7 48.6 trained 57.2 59.0 66.4
> EN →JA base 64.5 61.1 61.0 trained 68.8 71.5 78.4
> EN →ZH base 39.2 39.5 39.4 trained 41.3 42.3 45.0

4.3 Synthesis Margin 

Figure 3 compares multi-turn models trained with synthesis margins. δ = 0.5 is uncompetitive FLEURS 

Figure 1: Quality–latency frontiers for the base and canonical single-turn models under confidence, wait-k,and suffix-deletion controls. 

FLEURS 

Figure 2: Quality–latency frontiers for the base and canonical multi-turn models. 

and even degenerate for EN →ZH when tested on FLEURS. δ = 0 .2 matches or underperforms the original prefix model over most of the latency range. On the shorter CoVoST 2 utterances, however, its denser intermediate supervision extends the fron-tier to lower latency than the canonical multi-turn model can reach. These results expose a trade-off between low la-tency and reliable translation. Training on corpora synthesized with a small margin of δ = 0 .2, which commits target-prefix tokens more aggressively, can improve low-latency quality, but the gains vary by language pair and test set. At δ = 0 .5, train-ing produces a heavier tail of severe errors: some outputs drift into unsupported content or repetition, reducing translation fidelity. 

4.4 Single-turn vs. Multi-turn 

Figure 4 and Table 4 compare confidence sweeps for the single-turn, multi-turn, and synthesis-margin δ = 0 .2 models. The multi-turn models dominate the frontier over their latency range, especially for EN →DE/ZH. At the lower latency points, training with a small 

Table 4: AUC corresponding to Figure 4. Each row uses the shared latency interval for that dataset–language panel; best per row in bold .                     

> single-turn multi-turn δ= 0 .2
> FLEURS
> EN →DE 58.9 65.9 67.1
> EN →JA 80.0 80.1 79.2 EN →ZH 44.8 45.2 45.3 CoVoST 2
> EN →DE 67.4 72.9 74.5
> EN →JA 77.8 78.3 78.2 EN →ZH 77.8 78.9 78.8

synthesis margin is better than using the single-turn model, especially for the shorter utterances in CoVoST 2. The single-turn model can achieve even lower latency in some cases, but often at the cost of substantially lower translation quality. 

4.5 Commit Calibration 

Figure 5 compares commit calibration for all the models we have presented on 64 base-derived FLEURS oracle chains per direction. Prefix train-ing reduces multi-turn ECE by 63–68% across all evaluated prefixes, and by 68–80% on early pre-fixes. Relative to the matched multi-turn base, 

δ = 0 .2 reduces ECE by 56–63% overall and 65– FLEURS 

CoVoST 2 

> Figure 3: Confidence-controlled multi-turn frontiers for models trained with synthesis margins.

FLEURS 

CoVoST 2       

> Figure 4: Confidence frontiers for the canonical single-turn and multi-turn models and the multi-turn
> δ= 0 .2synthesis-margin ablation.

73% at early prefixes, while δ = 0 .5 reduces ECE by 27–39% overall and 32–42% at early prefixes. In contrast, single-turn training reduces overall ECE by only 3–11%, while early-prefix ECE wors-ens by 2–5%. Early-prefix calibration is especially important be-cause low-latency translation requires the model to decide whether to commit from a context contain-ing little audio. The multi-turn results show that dense boundary supervision is associated with improved confidence throughout the utterance, which may help explain the stronger low-latency frontier. Calibration alone does not explain the overall differences among models; the quality of prefix and full-sentence su-pervision may also contribute. The weak calibration gains of the single-turn model contrast with the text results of Hoang et al. (2026), despite the analogous training objective. We specu-Figure 5: Commit-confidence ECE for the single-turn, multi-turn, and synthesis-margin models. Error bars are pointwise 95% utterance-cluster bootstrap intervals. 

late on some of the reasons why this might be the case and why the multi-turn protocol is the better option for speech translation: • Acoustic segmentation. Text prefixes end at complete word boundaries and are rep-resented by native language-model tokens. Fixed 2 s speech blocks instead contain a vari-able amount of linguistic content, may end within words or phrases, and are encoded by a frozen audio tower. The decoder must there-fore infer both the content and completeness of an acoustically uncertain prefix. • Closing-token semantics. The closing token may retain its pretrained conversational mean-ing of ending an assistant response rather than acquiring a clean interpretation as “wait for more speech,” weakening the alignment be-tween EOS confidence and translation stabil-ity. • Oracle noise. The self-teacher oracle is de-rived from agreement between complete- and partial-waveform translations. Acoustic am-biguity can make these targets noisier than word-bounded text prefixes even after enforc-ing monotonicity. • Sequential supervision. Single-turn training samples independent initial-prefix examples, whereas multi-turn training supervises every boundary in order and preserves the preceding sequence of audio blocks, commitments, and explicit empty turns. This context may expose how evidence accumulates and provide a more direct signal for distinguishing continuation from waiting. 

5 Conclusion 

We presented prefix learning for adapting a speech language model to flicker-free simultaneous trans-lation without transcripts or human translations. Training on target prefixes improves the quality– latency frontier for both single-turn forced-prefix and multi-turn decoding. Among the tested infer-ence mechanisms, confidence provides the broadest and most consistently competitive operating range. Under multi-turn training, dense boundary super-vision is associated with substantially better con-fidence calibration across the utterance, including at early prefixes, while single-turn training yields only modest overall gains and no early-prefix im-provement. This contrast may help explain why the multi-turn model generally makes better-timed low-latency commitments. A small synthesis mar-gin sometimes extends low-latency coverage, par-ticularly on shorter utterances, whereas a larger margin degrades translation quality and calibra-tion. Prefix adaptation therefore improves simul-taneous speech translation, especially under multi-turn append-only decoding, while synthesis density introduces a non-monotonic quality–latency trade-off. 

6 Limitations 

• Experiments cover one base model (Qwen2.5-Omni-7B), three English-source language di-rections, and read or prompted speech bench-marks. Transfer to other model families, lan-guages, accents, domains, and spontaneous conversational speech remains untested. • Stable-prefix targets are synthesized by the base model using lexical longest-common-prefix agreement with its own full-audio trans-lation. They can inherit self-teacher errors and biases, and lexical stability does not guarantee semantic support or correctness. • Source time advances in fixed 2 s blocks with known utterance boundaries. We do not eval-uate adaptive segmentation, continuous un-segmented input, network delay, wall-clock decoding latency, throughput, or memory use; Average Lagging measures policy delay only, and the expected computational benefit of key– value cache reuse is not quantified. • Translation quality is measured automatically with COMET, without human evaluation of adequacy, fluency, or the usefulness of partial outputs. Output is monotone by construction, so the system prevents flicker but cannot re-vise an early erroneous commitment. • Calibration is evaluated on 64 FLEURS ora-cle chains per direction against base-derived continue-versus-stop labels. The results char-acterize commit confidence for these oracle commit-decision contexts and prompt repre-sentations, not generic language-model cal-ibration, human judgments of semantic cer-tainty, or out-of-domain calibration. • The single-turn and multi-turn comparisons change both the causal representation and the structure of training examples. Without a crossed train–inference representation study, their differences cannot be attributed solely to matching commit-decision contexts. • We did not audit Qwen2.5-Omni’s pretraining data for overlap with the evaluation sets, so benchmark contamination cannot be ruled out. 

References 

Victor Agostinelli, Max Wild, Matthew Raffel, Kazi Fuad, and Lizhong Chen. 2024. Simul-LLM: A frame-work for exploring high-quality simultaneous transla-tion with large language models. In Proceedings of the 62nd Annual Meeting of the Association for Com-putational Linguistics (Volume 1: Long Papers) , pages 10530–10541, Bangkok, Thailand. Association for Com-putational Linguistics. Rosana Ardila, Megan Branson, Kelly Davis, Michael Kohler, Josh Meyer, Michael Henretty, Reuben Morais, Lindsay Saunders, Francis Tyers, and Gregor Weber. 2020. Common voice: A massively-multilingual speech corpus. In Proceedings of the Twelfth Language Re-sources and Evaluation Conference , pages 4218–4222, Marseille, France. European Language Resources Asso-ciation. Naveen Arivazhagan, Colin Cherry, I Te, Wolfgang Macherey, Pallavi Baljekar, and George Foster. 2020. Re-translation strategies for long form, simultaneous, spoken language translation. In 2020 IEEE Interna-tional Conference on Acoustics, Speech and Signal Pro-cessing (ICASSP) , pages 7919–7923. Luisa Bentivogli, Mauro Cettolo, Marco Gaido, Alina Karakanta, Alberto Martinelli, Matteo Negri, and Marco Turchi. 2021. Cascade versus direct speech translation: Do the differences still make a difference? In Proceed-ings of the 59th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics and the 11th International Joint Conference on Natural Language Processing (Vol-ume 1: Long Papers) , pages 2873–2887, Online. Asso-ciation for Computational Linguistics. Kyunghyun Cho and Masha Esipova. 2016. Can neural machine translation do simultaneous translation? CoRR ,abs/1606.02012. Alexis Conneau, Min Ma, Simran Khanuja, Yu Zhang, Vera Axelrod, Siddharth Dalmia, Jason Riesa, Clara Rivera, and Ankur Bapna. 2022. FLEURS: Few-shot learning evaluation of universal representations of speech. Biao Fu, Minpeng Liao, Kai Fan, Chengxi Li, Liang Zhang, Yidong Chen, and Xiaodong Shi. 2025. LLMs can achieve high-quality simultaneous machine trans-lation as efficiently as offline. In Findings of the As-sociation for Computational Linguistics: ACL 2025 ,pages 20372–20395, Vienna, Austria. Association for Computational Linguistics. Jiatao Gu, Graham Neubig, Kyunghyun Cho, and Vic-tor O.K. Li. 2017. Learning to translate in real-time with neural machine translation. In Proceedings of the 15th Conference of the European Chapter of the Asso-ciation for Computational Linguistics: Volume 1, Long Papers , pages 1053–1062, Valencia, Spain. Association for Computational Linguistics. Hieu Hoang, Amittai Axelrod, and Matt Post. 2026. Dynamic lagging using stable-prefix training for simul-taneous translation. In Proceedings of the Eleventh Conference on Machine Translation , pages 261–275, Budapest, Hungary. Association for Computational Lin-guistics. Edward J. Hu, Yelong Shen, Phillip Wallis, Zeyuan Allen-Zhu, Yuanzhi Li, Shean Wang, Lu Wang, and Weizhu Chen. 2022. LoRA: Low-rank adaptation of large language models. In International Conference on Learning Representations (ICLR) .Liang Huang, Colin Cherry, Mingbo Ma, Naveen Ari-vazhagan, and Zhongjun He. 2020. Simultaneous trans-lation. In Proceedings of the 2020 Conference on Empir-ical Methods in Natural Language Processing: Tutorial Abstracts , pages 34–36, Online. Association for Com-putational Linguistics. Diederik P. Kingma and Jimmy Ba. 2015. Adam: A method for stochastic optimization. In International Conference on Learning Representations .Aviral Kumar and Sunita Sarawagi. 2019. Calibration of encoder decoder models for neural machine translation. 

CoRR , abs/1903.00802. Danni Liu, Gerasimos Spanakis, and Jan Niehues. 2020. Low-latency sequence-to-sequence speech recognition and translation by partial hypothesis selection. In Inter-speech 2020 , pages 3620–3624. Mingbo Ma, Liang Huang, Hao Xiong, Renjie Zheng, Kaibo Liu, Baigong Zheng, Chuanqiang Zhang, Zhongjun He, Hairong Liu, Xing Li, Hua Wu, and Haifeng Wang. 2019. STACL: Simultaneous transla-tion with implicit anticipation and controllable latency using prefix-to-prefix framework. In Proceedings of the 57th Annual Meeting of the Association for Compu-tational Linguistics , pages 3025–3036, Florence, Italy. Association for Computational Linguistics. Jan Niehues, Thai Son Nguyen, Eunah Cho, Thanh-Le Ha, Kevin Kilgour, Markus Müller, Matthias Sperber, Sebastian Stüker, and Alex Waibel. 2016. Dynamic Transcription for Low-Latency Speech Translation. In 

Interspeech 2016 , pages 2513–2517. Jan Niehues, Ngoc-Quan Pham, Thanh-Le Ha, Matthias Sperber, and Alex Waibel. 2018. Low-Latency Neural Speech Translation. In Interspeech 2018 , pages 1293– 1297. Siqi Ouyang, Xi Xu, and Lei Li. 2025. InfiniSST: Si-multaneous translation of unbounded speech with large language model. In Findings of the Association for Com-putational Linguistics: ACL 2025 , pages 3032–3046, Vienna, Austria. Association for Computational Linguis-tics. Yaniv Ovadia, Emily Fertig, Jie Ren, Zachary Nado, D. Sculley, Sebastian Nowozin, Joshua Dillon, Balaji Lakshminarayanan, and Jasper Snoek. 2019. Can you trust your model’s uncertainty? evaluating predictive uncertainty under dataset shift. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems , volume 32. Vassil Panayotov, Guoguo Chen, Daniel Povey, and San-jeev Khudanpur. 2015. LibriSpeech: An ASR corpus based on public domain audio books. In 2015 IEEE In-ternational Conference on Acoustics, Speech and Signal Processing (ICASSP) , pages 5206–5210. Peter Polák, Ngoc-Quan Pham, Tuan Nam Nguyen, Danni Liu, Carlos Mullov, Jan Niehues, Ondˇ rej Bo-jar, and Alexander Waibel. 2022. CUNI-KIT system for simultaneous speech translation task at IWSLT 2022. In Proceedings of the 19th International Conference on Spoken Language Translation (IWSLT 2022) , pages 277– 285, Dublin, Ireland (in-person and online). Association for Computational Linguistics. Ricardo Rei, José G. C. de Souza, Duarte Alves, Chrysoula Zerva, Ana C Farinha, Taisiya Glushkova, Alon Lavie, Luisa Coheur, and André F. T. Martins. 2022. COMET-22: Unbabel-IST 2022 submission for the metrics shared task. In Proceedings of the Sev-enth Conference on Machine Translation (WMT) , pages 578–585, Abu Dhabi, United Arab Emirates (Hybrid). Association for Computational Linguistics. Sukanta Sen, Rico Sennrich, Biao Zhang, and Barry Haddow. 2023. Self-training reduces flicker in retranslation-based simultaneous translation. In Pro-ceedings of the 17th Conference of the European Chap-ter of the Association for Computational Linguistics ,pages 3734–3744, Dubrovnik, Croatia. Association for Computational Linguistics. Changhan Wang, Anne Wu, and Juan Pino. 2020. CoV-oST 2 and massively multilingual speech-to-text trans-lation. Minghan Wang, Thuy-Trang Vu, Yuxia Wang, Ehsan Shareghi, and Gholamreza Haffari. 2025. Conversa-tional SimulMT: Efficient simultaneous translation with large language models. In Proceedings of the 22nd International Conference on Spoken Language Trans-lation (IWSLT 2025) , pages 93–105, Vienna, Austria (in-person and online). Association for Computational Linguistics. Jin Xu, Zhifang Guo, Jinzheng He, Hangrui Hu, Ting He, Shuai Bai, Keqin Chen, Jialin Wang, Yang Fan, Kai Dang, Bin Zhang, Xiong Wang, Yunfei Chu, and Junyang Lin. 2025. Qwen2.5-Omni technical report. Zhengdong Yang, Shuichiro Shimizu, Yahan Yu, and Chenhui Chu. 2025. When large language models meet speech: A survey on integration approaches. In Find-ings of the Association for Computational Linguistics: ACL 2025 , pages 20298–20315, Vienna, Austria. Asso-ciation for Computational Linguistics. Baigong Zheng, Kaibo Liu, Renjie Zheng, Mingbo Ma, Hairong Liu, and Liang Huang. 2020. Simultaneous translation policies: From fixed to adaptive. In Proceed-ings of the 58th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics , pages 2847–2853, Online. Association for Computational Linguistics. 

Appendices A Reproducibility Details 

Audio and target units. Audio is resampled to 16 kHz and segmented at the fixed 2 s cadence dic-tated by Qwen2.5-Omni’s audio implementation; this interval is not a tuned inference-mechanism parameter. A final partial block is retained unless it is shorter than 0.5 s, in which case it is merged with the preceding block. German target prefixes are segmented into whitespace-delimited words; Japanese and Chinese use characters. Prefix syn-thesis, training, validation, and evaluation use the same language-specific target unit. 

Corpus and splits. The assembled mixture con-tains 139 ,684 distinct English utterances: 27 ,937 

LibriSpeech-100, 69 ,842 LibriSpeech-360, and 

41 ,905 Common Voice utterances. The same ut-terances and block boundaries are reused for all three target languages and both representations. Ev-ery 50th chain in the assembled mixture is with-held from optimization; controlled selection uses at most the first 400 held-out chains. A post-selection EN →ZH diagnostic uses all 887 held-out Common Voice chains. Final evaluation uses 585 FLEURS utterances and 1,999 usable CoVoST 2 utterances per language direction. Direction single-turn multi-turn 

EN →DE 2,000 / 6,000 (384k) 3,000 / 6,000 (384k) EN →JA 2,500 / 6,000 (384k) 5,500 / 6,000 (384k) EN →ZH 1,000 / 6,000 (384k) 3,000 / 3,000 (192k) 

Table 6: Selected update / final update evaluated; parentheses give the total number of optimized records through the final update (updates multiplied by effective batch size 64). Table 5: Training, validation, and test data.                                 

> Dataset / genre Reference N
> Train mix Avg. audio (s)
> Training
> LibriSpeech-100
> Audiobook speech
> Self-teacher 27 ,403 20 .0% 12 .7
> LibriSpeech-360
> Audiobook speech
> Self-teacher 68 ,469 50 .0% 12 .6
> Common Voice
> Crowd-sourced read speech
> Self-teacher 41 ,018 30 .0% 5.7
> Training total 136 ,890 100 .0% —
> Validation
> Mixed holdout
> Audiobook +crowd-sourced read
> Self-teacher 400 —10 .4
> LibriSpeech-100 holdout
> Audiobook speech
> Self-teacher 400 —13 .0
> FLEURS development
> Multilingual read speech
> Human 347 —9.4
> Test
> FLEURS test
> Multilingual read speech
> Human 585 —9.7
> CoVoST 2
> Crowd-sourced read speech
> Human 1,999 —5.8

Optimization. All primary adapters start from Qwen2.5-Omni-7B. The audio and vision towers remain frozen. LoRA is applied only to the text decoder’s attention q, k, v, and output projections and MLP gate, up, and down projections, with rank 32, scaling factor 64, dropout 0.05 , and no bias. Training uses bfloat16, AdamW, a constant learning rate of 5×10 −6, and an effective batch size of 64. Multi-turn records longer than 1,200 tokens are omitted rather than truncated. The random seed is 42. Checkpoints are retained every 500 updates through the 6,000-update ceiling. 

Average Lagging. Let an utterance contain N

source blocks and let the final output contain T

target units. If gi is the number of source blocks read when target unit i is committed, γ = T /N ,and τ is the first target position emitted after all N

blocks have been read (or T if this never occurs), we compute 

AL blocks = 1

τ

> τ

X

> i=1



gi − i − 1

γ



,

AL sec = 2 AL blocks .

(5) An empty output is assigned source-end latency. Frontier selection uses attainable COMET: at each latency budget, a candidate receives the best COMET among its operating points at or below that budget, and these values are averaged over a common grid. 

Attainable-envelope AUC. Each dataset– language panel uses one shared latency interval 

[L, U ], where L and U are respectively the minimum and maximum Average Lagging in seconds over the union of all operating points from all compared sweeps in that panel. We evaluate 101 equally spaced budgets bj = L + j(U − L)/100 .Let Ss be sweep s’s set of (Average Lagging, COMET) points, let qworst be the lowest COMET value anywhere in the panel, and define 

Qs(b) = {q : ( a, q ) ∈ Ss, a ≤ b},Fs(b) = 

(

max Qs(b), Qs(b)̸ = ∅,qworst , otherwise ,

AUC s = 1101 

> 100

X

> j=0

Fs(bj ).

(6) Thus every sweep has the same domain and de-nominator, including below its minimum attainable latency. Tables 2 and 3 compare the base and se-lected trained models under wait-k, target suffix deletion, and confidence using one shared interval across all six sweeps in each panel; Table 4 ap-plies the same calculation to the three confidence frontiers in Figure 4. 

Cached decoding. Both representations exploit the block-local audio encoder and retain the fixed prefix and processed audio across boundaries. In the single-turn forced-prefix protocol, the commit-ted target and newly generated delta occupy a tem-porary cache extension that is cropped after de-coding; the growing committed target must there-fore be replayed at the next boundary. The multi-turn append-only cache is never cropped: each au-dio block and accepted assistant delta is appended permanently, so prior target states are reused as well as prior audio states. The single-turn forced-prefix and multi-turn append-only protocols apply the same confidence, wait-k, and suffix-deletion mechanisms within their respective prompt layouts. We do not report wall-clock latency, throughput, or memory use, so this computational motivation should not be interpreted as an empirical efficiency comparison. 

B Translation Prefix Synthesis 

Algorithm 1 constructs one training chain from an utterance. The normalization step removes sur-rounding whitespace and collapses internal whites-pace before target-unit segmentation. The full-audio decode uses the final prompt containing the end-of-audio marker; every proper prefix uses the streaming prompt. At each partial-audio decod-ing step, the aligned full-audio token replaces the greedy token when it is within synthesis margin δ

of the greedy probability. Setting δ = 0 recovers ordinary greedy prefix decoding. After decoding, lexical agreement and its running maximum deter-mine the monotone target commitment; the final boundary commits the complete anchor regardless of earlier agreement. 

C Chinese Self-Teacher Cleanup 

Inspection of the EN →ZH self-teacher outputs re-vealed trailing assistant-style clauses that invited the user to provide more audio, ask another transla-tion question, or request help. The cleaner consid-ers only suffixes beginning at a Chinese or ASCII sentence, clause, or comma boundary. It removes a suffix when the suffix begins with a conditional expression such as “if there is more” and contains both a topic cue (audio, content, translation, ques-tion, or English learning) within its first 80 charac-ters and an invitation cue (tell me, ask me, contact me, continue, anytime, welcome, or help) within its first 120 characters. It also removes direct suffixes beginning with an equivalent of “you can continue” or “you can tell me anytime.” The rule is applied to a fixed point so that nested boilerplate is removed, while punctuation and closing quotation marks be-longing to the retained translation are preserved. After cleaning the complete-audio anchor, every in-termediate commitment is truncated to the cleaned anchor length. The reconstruction procedure veri-fies that every row remains a prefix of the cleaned anchor, commitments remain monotone, and the final row equals the cleaned anchor. Chains whose anchors contain no translation after cleaning are 

Require: waveform a; boundaries 0 < t1 <

· · · < t K = |a|; frozen model g; synthesis mar-gin δ ∈ [0 , 1] ; generation limit L; model-token functions tok and detok ; target-unit functions 

seg and join 

Ensure: monotone commitments c1, . . . , c K 

> 1:

f ← normalize( g(a; FINAL ))  

> 2:

F ← seg( f ) 

> 3:

m ← 0 

> 4:

for i ← 1 to K − 1 do  

> 5:

Ri ← tok( f ◦ EOS ; a≤ti , STREAMING ) 

> 6:

Hi ← ()  

> 7:

while |Hi| < L do  

> 8:

p ← g(· | a≤ti , H i; STREAMING ) 

> 9:

x ← arg max v p(v); q ← | Hi| + 1  

> 10:

if q ≤ | Ri| then  

> 11:

r ← Ri,q  

> 12:

y ← r if x = r or p(r) + δ > p (x),otherwise y ← x 

> 13:

else  

> 14:

y ← x 

> 15:

end if  

> 16:

Hi ← Hi ◦ y 

> 17:

if y = EOS then  

> 18:

break  

> 19:

end if  

> 20:

end while  

> 21:

hi ← normalize(detok( Hi))  

> 22:

ℓi ← | lcp(seg( hi), F )| 

> 23:

m ← max( m, ℓ i) 

> 24:

ci ← join( F1: m) 

> 25:

end for  

> 26:

cK ← f 

> 27:

return (c1, . . . , c K )

> Algorithm 1: Self-anchored translation-prefix synthesis

quarantined rather than converted into empty train-ing targets. The audit covers all 139,684 EN →ZH chains. The procedure changes 92,039 chains (65.89%): 36,684 of 41,905 Common Voice chains and 55,355 of 97,779 LibriSpeech chains. Eight boilerplate-only chains are quarantined. Manual review covers 20 sampled changed chains and all 15 chains flagged as ambiguous or empty after cleaning. Seven am-biguous cases contain legitimate uses of expres-sions resembling the invitation cues and are con-servatively left unchanged; the remaining eight are the quarantined boilerplate-only chains. D LLM Prompt Templates 

Both contracts use Qwen2.5-Omni’s native system persona and one fixed streaming instruction. The instruction is not rewritten at the final boundary; the literal marker [end of audio] is appended af-ter the final audio block. The examples below show EN →DE. For Japanese and Chinese, the language name changes and no whitespace is inserted after a forced target prefix. 

D.1 Shared System Message and Instruction                                                                             

> [system] You are Qwen, avirtual human developed by the Qwen Team, Alibaba Group, capable of perceiving auditory and visual inputs, as well as generating text and speech. [instruction] You are translating ongoing English speech into German in real time. You will hear the speech in consecutive audio segments. After each segment, output ONLY the additional German translation that has become certain from the audio so far, and nothing else; if nothing new is yet certain, output nothing. When you see [end of audio], output the remaining translation needed to complete the utterance.

D.2 Single-Turn Forced-Prefix Decoding Template 

Each decision is rendered as a single user turn con-taining the complete audio observed so far. The previously committed translation is supplied as an open assistant prefix; only the continuation and closing token are generated and supervised. The initial partial and initially complete training tasks leave [forced] empty.                            

> [system] <Qwen2.5-Omni system persona> [user] <fixed instruction> <audio prefix> [forced] Wissenschaftler entdeckten --> eine neue Art [system] <Qwen2.5-Omni system persona> [user] <fixed instruction> <complete audio> [end of audio] [forced] Wissenschaftler entdeckten eine neue Art --> im Regenwald.

At inference, the system message, instruction, and audio prefix remain in the persistent cache. The forced and generated target region is recomputed at each boundary and then discarded from the cache, while the visible target commitment remains un-changed. 

D.3 Multi-Turn Append-Only Decoding Template 

The fixed instruction appears only with the first audio block. Subsequent user turns append one new block, and each assistant turn contains only the newly committed delta. An empty assistant turn is an explicit wait.                        

> [system] <Qwen2.5-Omni system persona> [user] <fixed instruction> <audio block 1> [assistant] Wissenschaftler [user] <audio block 2> [assistant] entdeckten eine neue Art [user] <audio block 3> [end of audio] [assistant] im Regenwald.

Training masks the system, user, instruction, and audio-placeholder tokens and supervises every as-sistant delta plus its closing token. During infer-ence the entire sequence remains in one persistent cache, so each decision can attend to all earlier au-dio blocks and committed deltas but never to future audio.