SonicWeave: Chunk-Routed Mixture-of-Experts for Unified
Audio Scene Generation
Yunrui Cai1,2,*, Xu Li1,†, Yucheng Zhou1, Jinchao Li1, Dingdong Wang2, Dongchao Yang2,
Xixin Wu2, Chen Zhang1, Zhiyong Wu3, Pengfei Wan1, Helen Meng2,†
1Kling Team, Kuaishou Technology
2The Chinese University of Hong Kong
3Shenzhen International Graduate School, Tsinghua University
{yrcai, hmmeng}@se.cuhk.edu.hk, lixu15@kuaishou.com
Abstract
Text-conditioned general audio generation is moving beyond isolated speech, music, and sound-effect synthesis toward a single
model that can compose them into controllable, coherent audio scenes. This unified setting is particularly challenging: heterogeneous
components impose conflicting structural requirements on a shared backbone, while a complex mixed scene may contain locally
distinct or overlapping content that demands fine-grained adaptation within the same clip. Existing audio mixture-of-experts (MoEs)
mainly route at the domain level, while token-wise routing overlooks the local continuity inherent to acoustic signals. We propose
SonicWeave, a flow-matching model for unified audio scene generation. At its core is a chunk-routed MoE with a conflict-gated
prior–evidence routing mechanism (CPE-MoE). CPE-MoE routes contiguous acoustic chunks by combining a global prior that
encodes the structured text condition and diffusion phase with local evidence from the evolving acoustic state. A learned conflict gate
favors the prior when local states are unreliable, while allowing local evidence to influence routing when a region departs from the
global scene context. SonicWeave supports speech, music, sound effects, singing, and their fine-grained mixtures with a single set of
weights. Across TTS, TTA, and TTM benchmarks, SonicWeave consistently improves over controlled Dense and Base-MoE baselines.
Complex-scene evaluation further demonstrates improved compositional quality, while routing analyses reveal content-dependent
expert specialization across diffusion phases. These results suggest that temporally coherent, prior–evidence routing is an effective
conditional-computation strategy for unified audio generation. Project page: https://caiyunrui.github.io/SonicWeave.
1
Introduction
Recent diffusion and flow-matching models [1] have broadened
text-conditioned synthesis across speech, music, and environ-
mental sounds [2–4]. The next step is general audio genera-
tion: one model should not only cover these domains, but also
compose them into coherent scenes and respond to structured
specifications of heterogeneous acoustic content—for exam-
ple, narration combined with music, ambience, and transient
sound events [5–8]. This capability is important for moving
from isolated audio generation to controllable modeling of real
acoustic environments.
This goal exposes a fundamental conditional-computation
problem at two granularities: across domains (speech vs. music)
and within a scene (locally overlapping components). Across
domains, speech requires linguistic precision, music requires
harmonic and rhythmic structure, and environmental sound
includes both stationary textures and transient events. Within a
single complex scene, these components may overlap or alter-
nate, so different local regions require different computation
and fine-grained control of heterogeneous content. A dense
diffusion transformer (DiT) applies the same feed-forward
transformation to every acoustic token, while existing audio
*Work done during an internship at Kling Team, Kuaishou Technology.
†Corresponding authors.
MoEs primarily target domain-level specialization [9]. Token-
wise routing may also vary unnecessarily across correlated
neighboring frames, and local acoustic states are unreliable at
early noisy diffusion phases. A useful unified generator there-
fore needs to coordinate global scene intent, local acoustic
evidence, and temporal continuity rather than treating routing
as an independent decision for every token.
Acoustic latents exhibit strong short-range dependence:
neighboring frames typically belong to the same phonetic unit,
musical texture, or environmental event, even when the broader
scene contains heterogeneous components. Chunk-level rout-
ing therefore occupies a useful middle ground between clip-
level routing, which cannot adapt within a scene, and frame-
level routing, which may fragment locally coherent structure.
We propose SonicWeave, a unified flow-matching model
designed for complex-scene generation with fine-grained lo-
cal adaptation. Its core CPE-MoE module—Conflict-gated
Prior–Evidence Mixture-of-Experts—routes contiguous acous-
tic chunks rather than independent frames. For each chunk,
CPE-MoE combines a global prior from structured scene text
and diffusion phase with local evidence from the evolving
acoustic representation. The learned conflict gate favors the
prior when local states are unreliable and shifts toward local
evidence when a region contains content not explained by the
global scene context. Text and time tokens remain on a shared
1
arXiv:2608.09571v1  [cs.SD]  10 Aug 2026


Figure 1: Overview of SonicWeave for unified audio scene generation. Natural-language descriptions are converted into structured captions that
separate speech content, vocal attributes, music, sound effects, and ambience. A single model then synthesizes these heterogeneous components
jointly, while its CPE-MoE module provides conflict-gated, content-aware routing across acoustic chunks.
expert, preserving a stable conditioning pathway. SonicWeave
is trained over speech, music, sound effects, singing, and mixed
scenes under one structured textual interface.
Experiments show that SonicWeave performs strongly
across TTS, TTA, and TTM while consistently improving over
controlled Dense and Base-MoE baselines. On controlled com-
plex scenes, it produces more coherent mixtures and better
follows structured specifications of foreground, background,
and speaker or vocal attributes. Routing analyses further show
content-dependent expert specialization and diffusion-phase-
adaptive use of the global prior and local evidence.
Our contributions are threefold:
• We identify conditional computation at two coupled granu-
larities—across audio domains and within heterogeneous
scenes—and formulate routing requirements that jointly
account for global scene intent, local acoustic state, and
short-range temporal continuity.
• We introduce CPE-MoE, which routes contiguous acous-
tic chunks using a diffusion-phase-aware text prior, local
acoustic evidence, and a learned conflict gate, while keep-
ing text and time tokens on a stable shared path.
• Through matched Dense and token-routed MoE controls,
public-task benchmarks, a 100-prompt complex-scene
suite, human listening tests, and routing analyses, we
show that the proposed routing improves compositional
fidelity without sacrificing perceptual quality.
2
Related Work
2.1
General and Unified Audio Generation
Text-conditioned audio generation has progressed from autore-
gressive audio language models to diffusion and flow-matching
systems for speech, music, and environmental sounds [2–4, 10].
Unified models extend this scope through shared representa-
tions or architectures [5–7, 11]. Dasheng AudioGen further tar-
gets coherent mixed scenes with structured multi-view captions
[8]. In contrast, we focus on conditional computation within a
unified continuous generator, where routing must resolve both
heterogeneous audio domains and local compositional conflicts
among coexisting scene components.
2.2
Structured Text Conditioning
Structured conditions improve controllability by exposing
event, temporal, or semantic factors beyond a single free-form
caption [12–14]. Our structured caption normalizes heteroge-
neous annotations into one interface for speech content and
attributes, music, sound events, and ambience. Unlike explicit
timeline planning, it supplies a common scene description;
CPE-MoE, the core module of SonicWeave, uses this global
information as a routing prior and combines it with evolving
local acoustic evidence.
2.3
Mixture-of-Experts for Diffusion and Audio
Generation
MoE enables conditional capacity through sparse expert acti-
vation and has been adapted to diffusion transformers [15–18].
In unified audio generation, UniMoE-Audio uses specialist-
initialized experts and dynamic allocation to mitigate speech–
music task conflict [9]. These approaches establish the value
of specialization, but operate at task/modality granularity or
route individual tokens. SonicWeave instead uses CPE-MoE to
route contiguous acoustic chunks with a conflict gate between a
global text-and-phase prior and local evidence, targeting stable,
fine-grained specialization in heterogeneous mixed scenes.
2


Figure 2: SonicWeave framework. Left: a stereo VAE encodes audio into continuous latents, which are jointly modeled with a structured-caption
stream in a flow-matching DiT. Right: the CPE-MoE module groups audio tokens into chunks and fuses a global text-and-phase prior with local
acoustic evidence for sparse expert routing.
3
Method
3.1
Overview
Our dual-stream conditional flow-matching generator, Son-
icWeave, jointly models audio and text. In the audio stream, a
stereo waveform is encoded by a pretrained stereo VAE into
continuous audio latents; the model denoises a noised latent
together with an optional masked reference for continuation
and inpainting. In the text stream, a frozen language encoder
embeds a structured audio caption. A joint audio–text diffusion
transformer (DiT) then predicts the flow velocity, with the CPE-
MoE module replacing the FFN in its final layers. Figure 2
summarizes the SonicWeave architecture and its CPE-MoE
block.
3.2
Structured Text Conditioning
We
convert
each
natural-language
annotation
into
a
compact, audio-only structured caption. An automatic
annotation pipeline first removes non-acoustic details and
extracts a fixed set of fields: type, language, speech text
or lyrics, speaker counts, speaker and vocal attributes,
music, sound effect, ambience, and recording texture.
The fields are serialized with explicit tags, e.g., Summary
sentence. <type>speech</type> <lang>en</lang>
<speech>...</speech> <music>...</music>.
This factorized format separates otherwise entangled scene
attributes, preserves linguistic content verbatim, and supplies a
consistent interface across speech, music, sound effects, and
mixed audio. The current schema explicitly supports up to
two speakers for dialogue-oriented scenes. A frozen language
encoder maps the resulting caption into text tokens for the
DiT; we use one shared encoder rather than domain-specific
conditioning modules.
3.3
Joint Audio–Text DiT Backbone
Sequence Construction.
Each transformer layer operates on the concatenation of three
modality groups:
h =

ttime
|{z}
1
∥T1:L
|{z}
text
∥A1:T
|{z}
audio

∈R(1+L+T)×d.
(1)
The time token ttime is obtained by summing sinusoidal embed-
dings for diffusion time t and segment start s, then projecting
the result to d. Text tokens are T = WcapE, where E denotes
the frozen language-encoder outputs. Audio tokens concate-
nate the noised stereo-VAE latent xt with the masked reference
c, followed by linear projection and convolutional positional
embedding.
Modality-Decoupled RoPE.
Inspired by the modality-specific coordinate design of M-RoPE
[19], we assign text and audio independent one-dimensional
position axes. The time token uses position 0, while text and
audio positions are reset separately:
pos(ttime) = 0, pos(Ti) = i, pos(Aj) = j.
(2)
With this modality-specific coordinate system, positional en-
coding preserves the intrinsic order of both text and audio while
keeping their coordinates independent of sequence length in the
other modality. It also provides a consistent relative-position
structure for joint attention to model cross-modal correspon-
dences.
Text-Conditioned AdaLN.
Joint self-attention provides token-level text–audio interaction,
while adaptive normalization offers a complementary path for
3


injecting global conditions into diffusion transformers [20]. We
additionally use phase-aware attention pooling over the struc-
tured caption to provide global AdaLN conditioning; details
are given in the appendix.
Cross-Modal Alignment Loss.
The shared DiT processes audio and text jointly, but flow match-
ing alone does not explicitly require their final hidden states to
be aligned. We therefore add a symmetric in-batch contrastive
objective, following the paired-representation alignment prin-
ciple used in CLIP [21]. Let ab and rb be the ℓ2-normalized,
mask-pooled audio and text states of sample b, respectively,
and define Sbb′ = exp(λ)a⊤
b rb′, where λ is learned. We mini-
mize
LCL = 1
2
h
CE(S,y)+CE(S⊤,y)
i
, yb = b.
(3)
This aligns paired audio–caption representations and supports
the text-derived prior and audio-derived evidence used by CPE-
MoE.
3.4
CPE-MoE: Conflict-Gated Prior–Evidence
Chunk Routing
The CPE-MoE module replaces the dense FFN in the final
transformer layers with shared and sparsely routed experts, pro-
viding conditional capacity for heterogeneous audio. As shown
in Figure 2, it learns routing from two complementary sources:
structured text and diffusion phase specify global generation
intent, while evolving audio states reveal local acoustic con-
tent. Routing contiguous chunks preserves short-range audio
continuity, allowing expert specialization across broad tasks
and locally mixed content under one objective.
Modality-Decoupled Dispatch.
Given the layer input h ∈RB×(1+L+T)×d, we split it into a
context group (time and text tokens) and an audio group:
hctx = h[:,:1+L], haud = h[:,−T:].
(4)
The context group is processed only by the shared expert octx =
MLPshared(hctx). This isolates the text and time representations
from the routing gate.
Chunk-Level Routing.
We partition the T audio states into Nc = ⌈T/C⌉non-
overlapping chunks {C j}Nc
j=1 of at most C consecutive frames.
Let mi ∈{0,1} indicate whether frame i is valid. The pooled
state of chunk j is
ej =
∑i∈Cj mihaud,i
max

1,∑i∈Cj mi
.
(5)
Padding-only chunks are excluded from routing and auxiliary
statistics. The prior–evidence router makes one top-K assign-
ment per valid chunk and broadcasts it to all frames in that
chunk. The selected experts nevertheless transform the original
frame states, not the pooled state e j. Thus, pooling controls
only expert selection: frame-level modeling is retained while
neighboring frames share a locally consistent computation path.
Importantly, the chunk is the routing unit rather than the rep-
resentation unit: expert selection is shared within a chunk, but
each expert still transforms the original frame-level states.
Prior and Evidence Signals.
The router combines two complementary signals with different
information scopes for each chunk.
Prior. A global, chunk-independent signal that summarizes
what to generate and at which diffusion phase:
p = [ttime ∥¯T] ∈R2d, ℓprior = Wprior(p) ∈RNe,
(6)
where ¯T is the mask-pooled text hidden state at the current layer.
Because p carries both the text summary and the diffusion-step
embedding, ℓprior is a task- and step-aware expert preference
that summarizes the global generation intent.
Evidence. A local signal is computed from the current context-
conditioned audio representation ej:
ℓevid
j
= Wevid(e j) ∈RNe.
(7)
Because ej is pooled after joint self-attention, it reflects the
acoustic state currently emerging in chunk j. The evidence
logits can thus capture local departures from the scene-level
description, such as a transient event within speech or music.
Both projections are 2-layer MLPs with SiLU activation
and zero-initialized output biases, avoiding an explicit expert
preference at initialization.
Conflict Gate and Fusion.
The prior gives a global expert preference, but local audio
becomes informative at different rates across diffusion phases
and acoustic regions. We therefore let each chunk decide how
far its routing should move from the prior toward the local
evidence. We first project the semantic–phase summary into
the d-dimensional hidden space of the joint DiT:
˜p = Walignp ∈Rd.
(8)
The gate observes both signals and their explicit pairwise
interactions:
φ j = LN([ ˜p ∥e j ∥˜p⊙ej ∥|˜p−ej|]),
(9)
gj = σ

MLPg(φ j)

.
(10)
Following pairwise matching features [31], the product ex-
poses coordinate-wise agreement and the absolute difference
exposes disagreement, while the original vectors retain source-
specific information. The MLP therefore learns how agreement
or conflict should affect routing rather than imposing a fixed
similarity rule; this is useful because discrepancy may reflect
either a meaningful local event or noisy evidence depending on
4


Table 1: Comparison with representative specialized and general-purpose audio generators. ✓indicates explicitly reported support; △denotes
partial support, limited public demonstrations or support under restricted settings; and – denotes no explicit evidence of support found in the
public documentation we reviewed. "Background" includes music, sound effects, environmental ambience, or their combinations.
Category
Model
General tasks
Complex-scene generation
TTS
TTA
TTM
Speech+Bg.
Sing+Bg.
Dialog
Dialog+Bg.
Specialized
CosyVoice 2 [22]
✓
–
–
–
–
–
–
F5-TTS [3]
✓
–
–
–
–
–
–
Step-Audio [23]
✓
–
–
–
–
△
–
TangoFlux [4]
–
✓
–
–
–
–
–
MusicGen-Large [24]
–
–
✓
–
–
–
–
SegTune [25]
–
–
✓
–
△
–
–
General / multi-task
Qwen2.5-Omni [26]
✓
△
△
–
–
△
–
AudioLDM 2 [5]
△
✓
△
△
△
–
–
Stable Audio Open [27]
–
✓
✓
–
△
–
–
UniAudio [6]
✓
✓
✓
△
–
–
–
AudioX [28]
–
✓
✓
–
–
–
–
Higgs Audio V2 [29]
✓
✓
△
△
–
✓
△
UniMoE-Audio [9]
✓
–
✓
–
–
–
–
UniFlow-Audio [30]
✓
✓
✓
△
–
△
△
Dasheng AudioGen [8]
✓
✓
✓
✓
–
△
△
General / compositional
SonicWeave (ours)
✓
✓
✓
✓
✓
✓
✓
diffusion phase. The gate is trained by the generation objective
as a conflict-conditioned evidence-reliance coefficient, not as a
calibrated probability of evidence correctness.
The meaning of gj acts directly in the expert-logit space:
the prior and evidence routers first produce logits of the same
shape, and g j linearly interpolates between them:
ℓj = (1−gj)ℓprior +gjℓevid
j
, P j = softmax(ℓj).
(11)
Thus, g j = 0 exactly recovers the prior logits, whereas gj = 1
exactly recovers the evidence logits. The top-K entries of Pj
select the experts, and their renormalized probabilities directly
weight the expert outputs.
Sparse Dispatch and Composition.
Top-K indices and weights are broadcast to frames within each
chunk; active expert outputs are weighted and accumulated,
with padding masked out.
The audio output of the layer is an equal-weight combination
of the shared expert and the sparse mixture,
oaud = 1
2 MLPshared(haud)+ 1
2 osparse.
(12)
The down-projection of each routed expert is zero-initialized,
so the sparse contribution starts near zero and is introduced
smoothly during optimization. The fixed 1
2: 1
2 composition pre-
vents an additional learnable mixture gate from suppressing the
routed path; gradients can update the expert down-projections
from the first step, after which the experts and router co-adapt.
The final layer output is [octx ∥oaud].
Load Balancing.
To prevent expert collapse we adopt a Switch-Transformer-
style auxiliary loss [15], computed at chunk granularity and
only over valid chunks:
LMoE = Ne ·
Ne
∑
i=1
¯pvalid
i
· ¯dvalid
i
,
(13)
where ¯pvalid is the mean router probability over valid chunks
and ¯dvalid is the mean top-K-normalised dispatch fraction.
Padded chunks are excluded from both statistics. The layer-
wise auxiliary losses are summed across the M CPE-MoE
layers and weighted in the composite objective below.
3.5
Conditional Flow-Matching Training
Given the ground-truth stereo-VAE latent x1, we sample
x0 ∼N (0,I) and t ∼σ(N (0,1)), form xt=(1−t)x0+tx1, and
regress the ground-truth velocity:
LFM = E
vθ(xt,c,ctext,t)−(x1 −x0)
2.
(14)
During training, we randomly mask a contiguous span of
the audio reference and compute the reconstruction loss on the
masked region; the audio reference and caption are indepen-
dently dropped for classifier-free guidance [32].
The composite objective is
L = LFM +αCLLCL +αMoELMoE.
(15)
3.6
Inference
We integrate the learned velocity field with a fixed-step Euler
ODE solver, using 100 uniform steps in t ∈[0,1]; an optional
5


cosine sway sampling schedule accelerates inference at low
step counts.
At inference we adopt Adaptive Projected Guidance
(APG) [33] and adapt it to the clean-sample estimate induced
by the CFM velocity parameterisation. With conditional and un-
conditional clean-sample estimates ˆµ and ˆµ∅, let ∆µ = ˆµ −ˆµ∅
and decompose it into components parallel and orthogonal to
ˆµ, denoted by ∆µ∥and ∆µ⊥. The guided estimate is
ˆµAPG = ˆµ∅+w
 η ∆µ∥+∆µ⊥

,
(16)
where w is the guidance scale and η damps the parallel com-
ponent. It is then converted back to velocity space for ODE
integration. Momentum smoothing, the clean-sample conver-
sion, and the complete update are given in the appendix. The
final clean stereo latent is decoded into waveform audio by the
pretrained stereo VAE decoder.
4
Experiments
4.1
Experimental Setup
Tasks and Benchmarks.
We evaluate one unified model on three public generation tasks
and a controlled complex-scene set. For text-to-speech (TTS),
we use SeedTTS-eval [34] and LibriSpeech-PC test-clean [35];
for text-to-audio (TTA), we use AudioCaps [36]; for text-to-
music (TTM), we use MusicCaps [37] and Song Describer [38].
The Complex-Scene set is described in the subsequent section.
For SonicWeave and controlled baselines, we determinis-
tically render benchmark inputs into a fixed schema using
constrained field-extraction rules. Where automatic parsing
is needed, a zero-temperature language model acts only as a
schema-aware extractor and validator; it is prohibited from in-
troducing information absent from the original input, apart
from fixed template defaults applied uniformly across the
benchmark. The converter does not observe reference audio.
Baselines.
We compare against representative specialized and general
audio generators selected for task coverage, availability, and
recency. For Complex-Scene evaluation, we retain Higgs Audio
V2, UniFlow-Audio, and Dasheng AudioGen, as they provide
the most relevant publicly available coverage of both speech
generation and general audio generation for mixed scenes.
Two key ablation models, Dense (1B) and Base-MoE (2B,
matching SonicWeave), share SonicWeave’s data and back-
bone. Dense replaces CPE-MoE with dense FFNs; Base-MoE
uses token-level top-K audio routing without conflict-gated
prior–evidence fusion. The Dense comparison measures the
benefit of conditional capacity, whereas the parameter-matched
Base-MoE comparison isolates the effect of the routing design
more directly.
The complete model capability comparison is given in Ta-
ble 1, while task-specific quantitative comparisons are reported
in Tables 2–4.
Metrics.
For all public benchmarks, we report objective metrics suited
to each task: WER/CER for TTS; FAD, KL divergence, and
CLAP for TTA; and KL divergence and CLAP for TTM. The
TTA and TTM KL/CLAP scores follow the Stable Audio met-
rics protocol with task-specific checkpoints, while TTA FAD
uses the AVBench FDVGG implementation. For the Complex-
Scene evaluation, we use Gemini-based reference-free judging
together with human listening tests. The two are used jointly
because the reference-free judge provides scalable coverage
over all prompts, while human MOS offers an independent per-
ceptual assessment on a fixed subset. Gemini assigns 1-5 scores
for semantic adherence and technical quality from the same
prompt; the concise scoring rubric is given in the appendix.
Implementation Details.
The CPE-MoE module replaces the dense FFN in the last 4
layers, with 4 routed experts and top-2 selection at chunk size
C=4. Inference uses a fixed-step Euler ODE solver with APG
guidance. Training uses roughly five million 10–15-second
clips sampled from an internal corpus exceeding 20,000 hours,
in which speech, music, sound effects, ambience, and mixed
recordings coexist in a shared data distribution. Additional
model and optimization details, together with targeted studies
of gate adaptivity and chunk-size sensitivity, are provided in
the appendix.
4.2
Results on Public Benchmarks
Tables 2-4 summarize the public-benchmark results. On TTS,
SonicWeave achieves the best or tied-best result on all three
subsets, tying the strongest reported results on SeedTTS-eval
and LibriSpeech. Relative to the controlled baselines, it im-
proves over Dense by 1.4, 1.0, and 2.5 percentage points on
these subsets, and over Base-MoE by 0.4, 0.3, and 0.8 points,
respectively.
Table 2: TTS results on SeedTTS and LibriSpeech.
Model
SeedTTS-en SeedTTS-zh LibriSpeech
WER↓
CER↓
WER↓
F5-TTS
1.9%
1.6%
2.4%
CosyVoice 2
2.0%
1.5%
2.5%
UniAudio
7.2%
–
18.3%
Qwen2.5-Omni
2.1%
1.6%
7.6%
UniMoE-Audio
1.3%
0.8%
3.4%
Higgs Audio V2
1.0%
0.8%
3.6%
Step-Audio
2.2%
1.0%
5.0%
Dense (ours)
2.4%
1.8%
4.9%
Base-MoE (ours)
1.4%
1.1%
3.2%
SonicWeave (ours)
1.0%
0.8%
2.4%
On TTA, SonicWeave substantially improves over Dense
and Base-MoE in all three metrics. Its CLAP score reaches
0.475, close to the strongest reported baseline (0.480), while
6


its KL is 1.26 and its FAD is 2.75. SonicWeave does not obtain
the best value on every individual AudioCaps metric, but it nar-
rows the gap to the strongest CLAP system while substantially
improving FAD and KL over the matched controls.
Table 3: TTA results on AudioCaps.
Model
FAD↓
KL↓
CLAP↑
AudioLDM 2
2.29
1.41
0.419
TangoFlux
2.26
1.15
0.480
Stable Audio Open
4.13
2.14
0.350
Dasheng AudioGen
3.19
1.86
0.438
UniAudio
6.64
–
0.243
UniFlow-Audio
5.74
1.43
0.476
AudioX
2.45
1.27
0.440
Dense (ours)
3.98
1.62
0.389
Base-MoE (ours)
3.10
1.40
0.422
SonicWeave (ours)
2.75
1.26
0.475
On TTM, SonicWeave achieves the lowest KL and highest
CLAP on Song Describer among the listed systems. On Music-
Caps, it achieves a competitive KL of 1.06 and CLAP of 0.312,
offering a strong quality–alignment trade-off and placing it on
the Pareto frontier among the listed baselines. Compared with
Dense and Base-MoE, SonicWeave consistently improves both
KL and CLAP across the two datasets, showing that CPE-MoE
strengthens text–music correspondence without uniformly sur-
passing every specialized baseline.
Table 4: TTM results on MusicCaps and Song Describer.
Model
MusicCaps
Song Describer
CLAP↑
KL↓
CLAP↑
KL↓
AudioLDM 2
0.301
1.20
–
–
MusicGen-Large
0.280
1.31
0.19
0.54
Stable Audio Open
0.300
1.44
0.32
0.62
AudioX
0.240
0.96
–
–
Dasheng AudioGen
0.334
1.37
–
–
UniMoE-Audio
0.340
1.25
0.22
–
UniFlow-Audio
0.241
1.87
0.15
–
Dense (ours)
0.251
1.31
0.29
0.58
Base-MoE (ours)
0.296
1.10
0.32
0.48
SonicWeave (ours)
0.312
1.06
0.36
0.44
4.3
Complex-Scene Evaluation
Public benchmarks mainly evaluate isolated speech, music, or
environmental sounds and therefore underrepresent the het-
erogeneous compositions targeted by SonicWeave. We con-
struct a controlled suite of 100 manually curated complex-
scene prompts, comprising 45 speech-with-background cases,
10 singing-with-background cases, 15 clean dialogues, and
30 dialogues with background. Each case is provided in both
natural-language and structured-caption forms. Public systems
receive the natural-language prompt in their native input for-
mat, whereas SonicWeave, Dense and Base-MoE receive the
corresponding structured caption containing the same semantic
specifications.
Table 5: Reference-free and human listening evaluation on the
Complex-Scene suite. AI-Tech and AI-Sem denote technical qual-
ity and semantic adherence, respectively; MOS-Q measures perceived
audio quality, while MOS-R measures whether the requested prompt
events are jointly realized.
Model
AI-Tech↑AI-Sem↑MOS-Q↑MOS-R↑
Higgs Audio V2
4.32
3.54
3.92±0.21 2.42±0.64
UniFlow-Audio
2.28
1.77
1.99±0.33 1.87±0.80
Dasheng AudioGen
3.10
3.07
2.97±0.41 3.25±0.73
Dense (ours)
4.13
4.23
4.29±0.24 4.15±0.37
Base-MoE (ours)
4.62
4.58
4.57±0.13 4.31±0.31
SonicWeave (ours)
4.79
4.72
4.57±0.19 4.49±0.38
Table 5 shows consistent trends between the reference-free
AI evaluation and human listening tests. SonicWeave achieves
the highest AI semantic-adherence and technical-quality scores
and the highest human MOS-R. Higgs Audio V2 retains rela-
tively competitive perceived quality but receives a much lower
request-realization score, showing that audio quality alone
does not imply faithful realization of all requested scene com-
ponents. Dasheng AudioGen and UniFlow-Audio additionally
show less consistent performance across the heterogeneous
prompts. SonicWeave and Base-MoE are effectively tied on
MOS-Q, whereas SonicWeave is consistently stronger in se-
mantic adherence and request realization. This supports the
intended role of CPE-MoE: it preserves the acoustic quality
of the underlying generator while improving compositional
fidelity and fine-grained control in complex scenes.
4.4
Routing Analysis and Visualization
To explain the behavior of SonicWeave beyond aggregate gen-
eration metrics, we analyze the routing patterns induced by
its CPE-MoE module. The main-text visualization focuses
on population-level evidence: content-conditioned expert us-
age and the evolution of the conflict gate across diffusion
phases. Representative mixed-scene traces are reserved for the
appendix because they illustrate the mechanism qualitatively
rather than providing a statistically aggregated result.
For this analysis, we construct a 250-prompt routing bench-
mark by sampling examples from several single-task evaluation
sets and combining them with complex-scene prompts. We
group the resulting prompts into speech, music, singing, SFX,
and mixed-scene categories, and aggregate routing statistics
over all valid chunks and routed layers.
Content-conditioned expert specialization.
Figure 3(a) shows the mean dispatch fraction for each expert
across the four CPE-MoE layers and five content groups. The
load is clearly non-uniform and content dependent: speech
7


(a)
(b)
Figure 3: Routing analysis on the balanced routing benchmark. (a) Content-conditioned expert dispatch across routed layers, showing
non-uniform and content-dependent specialization. (b) Mean conflict gate E[gj|t] across diffusion phases, showing content-dependent and
phase-dependent prior–evidence balancing.
and SFX favor different expert combinations from music
and singing, while mixed scenes retain a distinct distribution
rather than collapsing to one of the single-content patterns.
This specialization is also layer dependent. For example, mu-
sic and singing place more mass on different experts in the
deeper routed layers, whereas speech consistently emphasizes
a smaller subset of experts. These observations indicate that
the MoE is using conditional capacity to form acoustic spe-
cializations, rather than merely distributing tokens uniformly
across experts.
Phase-dependent conflict gating.
Figure 3(b) reports E[gj|t] for each content group. The curves
are content dependent and non-monotonic: the gate changes
rapidly during early structure formation, reaches content-
specific operating ranges, and gradually returns toward a more
balanced regime during late acoustic refinement. Speech and
SFX maintain higher evidence reliance than music and singing
over much of the trajectory, while mixed scenes lie between
these regimes. Thus, the model does not apply a single fixed
prior–evidence interpolation to all audio. Instead, it adjusts
evidence reliance as a function of both acoustic content and
diffusion phase, consistent with the intended role of the conflict
gate.
5
Conclusion
This paper presented SonicWeave, a unified flow-matching
model for generating speech, singing, music, sound effects,
and their mixtures with a single set of parameters. The central
premise of this work is that conditional computation in unified
audio must operate at two coupled scales: it must accommodate
differences across acoustic domains while adapting to heteroge-
neous regions within the same scene. CPE-MoE addresses this
requirement by routing temporally contiguous audio chunks
through a learned combination of a global text-and-diffusion
prior and local acoustic evidence, while preserving a shared
conditioning pathway for text and time tokens.
Across public TTS, text-to-audio, and text-to-music bench-
marks, SonicWeave consistently improves over matched Dense
and token-routed MoE controls. On the Complex-Scene suite,
the principal gain is compositional: SonicWeave improves se-
mantic adherence and joint request realization while maintain-
ing perceptual quality comparable to the parameter-matched
Base-MoE. Quantitatively, it reduces TTA FAD by 30.9% over
Dense and improves Complex-Scene MOS-R by 0.18 over
Base-MoE and by more than 1.2 points over the strongest exter-
nal baseline. The learned expert assignments and conflict-gate
trajectories also vary with content, layer depth, and diffusion
phase, providing evidence that the additional capacity is used
conditionally rather than uniformly.
Targeted studies reported in the appendix further compare
the learned gate with fixed prior–evidence averaging and vary
the routing chunk size. Fixed fusion degrades all reported task
groups, while increasing the chunk size from 4 to 8 weakens
most metrics, supporting adaptive fusion and relatively fine-
grained chunk routing.
These findings support chunk-level prior–evidence routing
as a useful intermediate granularity for unified audio generation.
At the same time, the current evaluation is limited to short-
form generation, a two-speaker structured interface, and non-
exhaustive routing ablations. Extending the approach to longer
scenes, richer speaker interactions, and explicit temporal plans
remains an important direction.
References
[1] Yaron Lipman, Ricky T. Q. Chen, Heli Ben-Hamu, Maxi-
milian Nickel, and Matthew Le. Flow matching for gener-
ative modeling. In The Eleventh International Conference
on Learning Representations, pages 1–28, 2023.
[2] Matthew Le, Apoorv Vyas, Bowen Shi, Brian Karrer,
Leda Sari, Rashel Moritz, Mary Williamson, Vimal
Manohar, Yossi Adi, Jay Mahadeokar, et al. Voicebox:
Text-guided multilingual universal speech generation at
8


scale. Advances in neural information processing systems,
36:14005–14034, 2023.
[3] Yushen Chen, Zhikang Niu, Ziyang Ma, Keqi Deng,
Chunhui Wang, Jian Zhao, Kai Yu, and Xie Chen. F5-
TTS: A fairytaler that fakes fluent and faithful speech
with flow matching. In Proceedings of the 63rd Annual
Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics
(Volume 1: Long Papers), pages 6255–6271, 2025.
[4] Chia-Yu Hung, Navonil Majumder, Zhifeng Kong, Ambuj
Mehrish, Amir Zadeh, Chuan Li, Rafael Valle, Bryan
Catanzaro, and Soujanya Poria. Tangoflux: Super fast and
faithful text to audio generation with flow matching and
clap-ranked preference optimization. In The Fourteenth
International Conference on Learning Representations,
pages 1–24, 2026.
[5] Haohe Liu, Yi Yuan, Xubo Liu, Xinhao Mei, Qiuqiang
Kong, Qiao Tian, Yuping Wang, Wenwu Wang, Yuxuan
Wang, and Mark D. Plumbley. AudioLDM 2: Learning
holistic audio generation with self-supervised pretrain-
ing. IEEE/ACM Transactions on Audio, Speech, and
Language Processing, 32:2871–2883, 2024.
[6] Dongchao Yang, Jinchuan Tian, Xu Tan, Rongjie Huang,
Songxiang Liu, Haohan Guo, Xuankai Chang, Jiatong
Shi, Sheng Zhao, Jiang Bian, Zhou Zhao, Xixin Wu, and
Helen M. Meng. UniAudio: Towards universal audio
generation with large language models. In Proceedings of
the 41st International Conference on Machine Learning,
pages 56422–56447, 2024.
[7] Apoorv Vyas, Bowen Shi, Matthew Le, Andros Tjandra,
Yi-Chiao Wu, Baishan Guo, Jiemin Zhang, Xinyue Zhang,
Robert Adkins, William Ngan, Jeff Wang, Ivan Cruz, Bapi
Akula, Akinniyi Akinyemi, Brian Ellis, Rashel Moritz,
Yael Yungster, Alice Rakotoarison, Liang Tan, Chris Sum-
mers, Carleigh Wood, Joshua Lane, Mary Williamson,
and Wei-Ning Hsu. Audiobox: Unified audio generation
with natural language prompts. CoRR, abs/2312.15821,
2023. doi: 10.48550/arXiv.2312.15821.
[8] Jiahao Mei, Heinrich Dinkel, Yadong Niu, Xingwei Sun,
Gang Li, Yifan Liao, Jiahao Zhou, Junbo Zhang, Jian
Luan, and Mengyue Wu. Dasheng AudioGen: A unified
model for generating coherent audio scenes from text.
CoRR, abs/2605.27838, 2026. doi: 10.48550/arXiv.2605.
27838.
[9] Zhenyu Liu, Yunxin Li, Xuanyu Zhang, Qixun Teng,
Shenyuan Jiang, Xinyu Chen, Haoyuan Shi, Haolan Chen,
Fanbo Meng, Mingjun Zhao, Yu Xu, Yancheng He, Bao-
tian Hu, Haizhou Li, and Min Zhang. UniMoE-Audio:
Unified speech and music generation with dynamic-
capacity mixture-of-experts. In Proceedings of the 64th
Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational
Linguistics (Volume 1: Long Papers), pages 9107–9119,
2026.
[10] Haohe Liu, Zehua Chen, Yi Yuan, Xinhao Mei, Xubo Liu,
Danilo P. Mandic, Wenwu Wang, and Mark D. Plumbley.
AudioLDM: Text-to-audio generation with latent diffu-
sion models. In Proceedings of the 40th International
Conference on Machine Learning, pages 21450–21474,
2023.
[11] Chunyu Qiang, Xiaopeng Wang, Kang Yin, Yuzhe Liang,
Yuxin Guo, Teng Ma, Ziyu Zhang, Tianrui Wang, Cheng
Gong, Yushen Chen, Ruibo Fu, Longbiao Wang, and
Jianwu Dang. UniSonate: A unified model for speech,
music, and sound effect generation with text instructions.
In Proceedings of the 64th Annual Meeting of the Associ-
ation for Computational Linguistics, pages 28043–28054,
2026.
[12] Jiawei Huang, Yi Ren, Rongjie Huang, Dongchao
Yang, Zhenhui Ye, Chen Zhang, Jinglin Liu, Xiang
Yin, Zejun Ma, and Zhou Zhao.
Make-An-Audio 2:
Temporal-enhanced text-to-audio generation.
CoRR,
abs/2305.18474, 2023. doi: 10.48550/arXiv.2305.18474.
[13] Deepanway Ghosal, Navonil Majumder, Ambuj Mehrish,
and Soujanya Poria. Text-to-audio generation using in-
struction guided latent diffusion model. In Proceedings
of the 31st ACM international conference on multimedia,
pages 3590–3598, 2023.
[14] Yuxuan Jiang, Zehua Chen, Zeqian Ju, Chang Li, Weibei
Dou, and Jun Zhu. Freeaudio: Training-free timing plan-
ning for controllable long-form text-to-audio generation.
In Proceedings of the 33rd ACM International Confer-
ence on Multimedia, pages 9871–9880, 2025.
[15] William Fedus, Barret Zoph, and Noam Shazeer. Switch
transformers: Scaling to trillion parameter models with
simple and efficient sparsity. Journal of Machine Learn-
ing Research, 23(120):1–39, 2022.
[16] Zhengcong Fei, Mingyuan Fan, Changqian Yu, Debang
Li, and Junshi Huang. Scaling diffusion transformers to
16 billion parameters. CoRR, abs/2407.11633, 2024. doi:
10.48550/arXiv.2407.11633.
[17] Byeongjun Park, Hyojun Go, Jin-Young Kim, Sangmin
Woo, Seokil Ham, and Changick Kim. Switch diffu-
sion transformer: Synergizing denoising tasks with sparse
mixture-of-experts. In European Conference on Com-
puter Vision, pages 461–477. Springer, 2024.
[18] Haotian Sun, Tao Lei, Bowen Zhang, Yanghao Li,
Haoshuo Huang, Ruoming Pang, Bo Dai, and Nan Du.
EC-DIT: Scaling diffusion transformers with adaptive
expert-choice routing. In The Thirteenth International
Conference on Learning Representations, 2025.
[19] Peng Wang, Shuai Bai, Sinan Tan, Shijie Wang, Zhi-
hao Fan, Jinze Bai, Keqin Chen, Xuejing Liu, Jialin
Wang, Wenbin Ge, Yang Fan, Kai Dang, Mengfei Du,
Xuancheng Ren, Rui Men, Dayiheng Liu, Chang Zhou,
9


Jingren Zhou, and Junyang Lin. Qwen2-VL: Enhanc-
ing vision-language model’s perception of the world
at any resolution. CoRR, abs/2409.12191, 2024. doi:
10.48550/arXiv.2409.12191.
[20] William Peebles and Saining Xie. Scalable diffusion mod-
els with transformers. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF In-
ternational Conference on Computer Vision, pages 4195–
4205, 2023.
[21] Alec Radford, Jong Wook Kim, Chris Hallacy, Aditya
Ramesh, Gabriel Goh, Sandhini Agarwal, Girish Sastry,
Amanda Askell, Pamela Mishkin, Jack Clark, Gretchen
Krueger, and Ilya Sutskever. Learning transferable visual
models from natural language supervision. In Proceed-
ings of the 38th International Conference on Machine
Learning, pages 8748–8763, 2021.
[22] Zhihao Du, Yuxuan Wang, Qian Chen, Xian Shi, Xiang
Lv, Tianyu Zhao, Zhifu Gao, Yexin Yang, Changfeng
Gao, Hui Wang, Fan Yu, Huadai Liu, Zhengyan Sheng,
Yue Gu, Chong Deng, Wen Wang, Shiliang Zhang, Zhijie
Yan, and Jingren Zhou. CosyVoice 2: Scalable streaming
speech synthesis with large language models. CoRR,
abs/2412.10117, 2024. doi: 10.48550/arXiv.2412.10117.
[23] Ailin Huang, Boyong Wu, Bruce Wang, Chao Yan, Chen
Hu, Chengli Feng, Fei Tian, Feiyu Shen, Jingbei Li, Min-
grui Chen, et al.
Step-Audio: Unified understanding
and generation in intelligent speech interaction. CoRR,
abs/2502.11946, 2025. doi: 10.48550/arXiv.2502.11946.
[24] Jade Copet, Felix Kreuk, Itai Gat, Tal Remez, David Kant,
Gabriel Synnaeve, Yossi Adi, and Alexandre Défossez.
Simple and controllable music generation. Advances in
neural information processing systems, 36:47704–47720,
2023.
[25] Yuejiao Wang, Zihao Ji, Pengfei Cai, Xu Li, Haorui
Zheng, Zewen Song, Zhongliang Liu, Chen Zhang, and
Pengfei Wan. SegTune: Structured and fine-grained con-
trol for song generation. In Proceedings of the 64th An-
nual Meeting of the Association for Computational Lin-
guistics (Volume 1: Long Papers), pages 12883–12897.
Association for Computational Linguistics, 2026. doi:
10.18653/v1/2026.acl-long.586.
[26] Jin Xu, Zhifang Guo, Jinzheng He, Hangrui Hu, Ting He,
Shuai Bai, Keqin Chen, Jialin Wang, Yang Fan, Kai Dang,
Bin Zhang, Xiong Wang, Yunfei Chu, and Junyang Lin.
Qwen2.5-Omni technical report. CoRR, abs/2503.20215,
2025. doi: 10.48550/arXiv.2503.20215.
[27] Zach Evans, Julian D. Parker, CJ Carr, Zack Zukowski,
Josiah Taylor, and Jordi Pons. Stable audio open. In
IEEE International Conference on Acoustics, Speech and
Signal Processing, pages 1–5, 2025.
[28] Zeyue Tian, Zhaoyang Liu, Yizhu Jin, Ruibin Yuan, Li-
umeng Xue, Xu Tan, Qifeng Chen, Wei Xue, and Yike
Guo. Audiox: A unified framework for anything-to-audio
generation. In The Fourteenth International Conference
on Learning Representations, pages 1–27, 2026.
[29] Boson AI. Higgs Audio V2: Redefining expressiveness
in audio generation. GitHub repository, 2025. Boson AI
Higgs Audio project.
[30] Xuenan Xu, Jiahao Mei, Zihao Zheng, Ye Tao, Zeyu
Xie, Yaoyun Zhang, Haohe Liu, Yuning Wu, Ming Yan,
Wen Wu, Chao Zhang, and Mengyue Wu.
UniFlow-
Audio: Unified flow matching for audio generation from
omni-modalities. CoRR, abs/2509.24391, 2025. doi:
10.48550/arXiv.2509.24391.
[31] Alexis Conneau, Douwe Kiela, Holger Schwenk, Loïc
Barrault, and Antoine Bordes. Supervised learning of
universal sentence representations from natural language
inference data. In Proceedings of the 2017 Conference
on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing,
pages 670–680. Association for Computational Linguis-
tics, 2017. doi: 10.18653/v1/D17-1070.
[32] Jonathan Ho and Tim Salimans. Classifier-free diffusion
guidance. arXiv preprint arXiv:2207.12598, 2022.
[33] Seyedmorteza Sadat, Otmar Hilliges, and Romann M
Weber. Eliminating oversaturation and artifacts of high
guidance scales in diffusion models. In The Thirteenth
International Conference on Learning Representations,
2025.
[34] Philip Anastassiou, Jiawei Chen, Jitong Chen, Yuanzhe
Chen, Zhuo Chen, Ziyi Chen, Jian Cong, Lelai Deng,
Chuang Ding, Lu Gao, Mingqing Gong, Peisong
Huang, Qingqing Huang, Zhiying Huang, Yuanyuan Huo,
Dongya Jia, Chumin Li, Feiya Li, Hui Li, Jiaxin Li, Xi-
aoyang Li, Xingxing Li, Lin Liu, Shouda Liu, Sichao
Liu, Xudong Liu, Yuchen Liu, Zhengxi Liu, Lu Lu, Jun-
jie Pan, Xin Wang, Yuping Wang, Yuxuan Wang, Zhen
Wei, Jian Wu, Chao Yao, Yifeng Yang, Yuanhao Yi, Jun-
teng Zhang, Qidi Zhang, Shuo Zhang, Wenjie Zhang,
Yang Zhang, Zilin Zhao, Dejian Zhong, and Xiaobin
Zhuang. Seed-TTS: A family of high-quality versatile
speech generation models. CoRR, abs/2406.02430, 2024.
doi: 10.48550/arXiv.2406.02430.
[35] Aleksandr Meister, Matvei Novikov, Nikolay Karpov,
Evelina Bakhturina, Vitaly Lavrukhin, and Boris Gins-
burg. Librispeech-pc: Benchmark for evaluation of punc-
tuation and capitalization capabilities of end-to-end asr
models. In 2023 IEEE Automatic Speech Recognition
and Understanding Workshop (ASRU), pages 1–7, 2023.
[36] Chris Dongjoo Kim, Byeongchang Kim, Hyunmin Lee,
and Gunhee Kim. AudioCaps: Generating captions for
audios in the wild. In Proceedings of the 2019 Confer-
ence of the North American Chapter of the Association
for Computational Linguistics: Human Language Tech-
nologies, Volume 1, pages 119–132, 2019.
10


[37] Andrea Agostinelli, Timo I. Denk, Zalán Borsos, Jesse H.
Engel, Mauro Verzetti, Antoine Caillon, Qingqing
Huang, Aren Jansen, Adam Roberts, Marco Tagliasacchi,
Matthew Sharifi, Neil Zeghidour, and Christian Havnø
Frank. MusicLM: Generating music from text. CoRR,
abs/2301.11325, 2023. doi: 10.48550/arXiv.2301.11325.
[38] Ilaria Manco, Benno Weck, Seungheon Doh, Minz Won,
Yixiao Zhang, Dmitry Bogdanov, Yusong Wu, Ke Chen,
Philip Tovstogan, Emmanouil Benetos, Elio Quinton,
György Fazekas, and Juhan Nam. The song describer
dataset: A corpus of audio captions for music-and-
language evaluation. CoRR, abs/2311.10057, 2023. doi:
10.48550/arXiv.2311.10057.
[39] Shuai Bai, Yuxuan Cai, Ruizhe Chen, Keqin Chen,
Xionghui Chen, Zesen Cheng, Lianghao Deng, Wei Ding,
Chang Gao, Chunjiang Ge, et al. Qwen3-vl technical
report. arXiv preprint arXiv:2511.21631, 2025.
[40] Alec Radford, Jong Wook Kim, Tao Xu, Greg Brock-
man, Christine McLeavey, and Ilya Sutskever. Robust
speech recognition via large-scale weak supervision. In
Proceedings of the 40th International Conference on Ma-
chine Learning, volume 202 of Proceedings of Machine
Learning Research, pages 28492–28518, 2023.
[41] Zhifu Gao, Shiliang Zhang, Ian McLoughlin, and Zhijie
Yan. Paraformer: Fast and accurate parallel transformer
for non-autoregressive end-to-end speech recognition. In
Interspeech 2022, pages 2063–2067, 2022. doi: 10.21437/
Interspeech.2022-9996.
11


A
Architecture and Objective Details
A.1
Phase-Aware Text Pooling and AdaLN Con-
ditioning
Let E ∈RB×L×dE be the frozen text-encoder states, where
dE = 4096, and let m ∈{0,1}B×L be the caption-validity mask.
The diffusion-time and segment-start embeddings are denoted
by t and s, respectively. We first construct the phase condition
u = t+s ∈RB×dc,
dc = 512.
(17)
Rather than mean-pooling all text tokens, SonicWeave uses u
as a query that changes with the generation phase:
q = Wqu,
K = WkE,
ai = q⊤Ki
√dE
,
αi =
exp(ai)mi
∑L
r=1 exp(ar)mr +ε ,
¯e =
L
∑
i=1
αiEi,
c = u+Wg¯e.
(18)
The implementation masks invalid text positions before the
softmax, multiplies the resulting weights by m once more, and
renormalizes. Consequently, padding contributes neither to ¯e
nor to its gradients. If all text tokens are absent (the caption-
dropped classifier-free guidance branch), ¯e is set to zero and
c = u.
The global condition c is supplied to the final AdaLN-Zero
layer that normalizes the audio-token states before the veloc-
ity projection. Token-level text–audio correspondence is still
modeled through joint self-attention; Eq. (18) is a complemen-
tary global path. Its phase-dependent query lets the model alter
which parts of a structured caption are globally emphasized dur-
ing generation, while the residual u preserves explicit diffusion
and segment-position information.
A.2
Backbone and CPE-MoE Configuration
Table 6 lists the configuration used by the reported SonicWeave
model. The model consumes a sequence consisting of one time
token, up to 200 text tokens in the reported configuration, and
at most 256 audio latent frames. Text and audio positions use
independent coordinate ranges under rotary positional embed-
ding, so an audio position does not change when the caption
length changes. The audio input projection receives the con-
catenation of the current noised latent and the masked reference
latent; the velocity head predicts 64 channels per latent frame.
Each routed block retains one shared FFN. The time token
and all text tokens are processed only by this shared FFN.
Only audio tokens enter the routed path, which prevents the
routing decision from directly modifying the condition-token
pathway. For a valid chunk, top-2 posterior probabilities are
renormalized to sum to one, broadcast to all frames in the
chunk, and used to weight the corresponding expert outputs.
Expert outputs are computed on the original frame states, not
on pooled chunk states; pooling is used only to make a routing
decision.
Table 6: Backbone and CPE-MoE configuration. The text encoder is
frozen; all listed DiT and routing components are trained jointly.
Component
Configuration
Text encoder
Frozen Qwen3-VL-8B [39] text en-
coder; dE = 4096
DiT width / depth
d = 2048 / 16 transformer blocks
Attention
32 heads; head width 64; SDPA at-
tention
Dense FFN width
4d = 8192; SiLU activation
Text-token limit
200 tokens
Max audio length
256 latent frames
Latent channels
64 channels
AdaLN width
512
Routed blocks
Final 4 of 16 blocks
Routed experts
4 experts per routed block
Sparse selection
Top-2 experts per valid chunk
Chunk length
C = 4 latent frames
CL Loss
αCL=0.1
Load Balancing
αMoE=0.05
The routed experts use zero-initialized output projections.
Thus, the routed contribution begins near zero and is intro-
duced smoothly as optimization learns both the experts and the
router. For audio tokens, the shared and sparse paths are com-
bined with equal weights, 1
2oshared + 1
2osparse. Padding frames
and padding-only chunks are masked before dispatch and are
excluded from all router statistics.
B
Structured Prompt Interface
B.1
Schema and Field Semantics
SonicWeave uses one structured text-conditioning interface
for all text-to-audio generation modes. A prompt consists of
a short natural-language summary followed by a sparse set
of XML-like fields (shown in Table 7). Fields with no appli-
cable information are omitted rather than filled with generic
text. This is important: absence is meaningful for, for exam-
ple, instrumental music, which should not receive an invented
transcript or vocal attribute.
The division between sfx, ambience, and texture is de-
liberate. sfx identifies events that must be audibly realized,
ambience identifies the persistent environment, and texture
specifies how components should coexist. For instance, “rain”
may be an event in sfx, “an urban street in a downpour” be-
longs in ambience, and “rain intermittently masks dialogue”
belongs in texture. This factorization makes foreground con-
tent, background content, and their acoustic relationship sepa-
rately addressable by the text encoder and the CPE-MoE prior.
B.2
Natural-to-Structured Conversion
SonicWeave uses a unified structured audio caption interface
to represent heterogeneous acoustic content. The goal of this
conversion is not to rewrite or enrich natural-language descrip-
12


Table 7: Structured prompt fields. The interface describes requested audible attributes only.
Field
Value type
Semantics
type
categorical
Dominant audio mode: speech, singing, music, sound effects, or
mixed. mixed is used only when two or more of speech, singing,
music, and sound effects are explicitly requested; it does not itself
imply speech.
lang
language code
Language of intelligible speech or singing. It is omitted for non-
vocal audio.
speech
verbatim text
Spoken linguistic content, including ordered dialogue turns sepa-
rated by slashes when applicable.
lyrics
text
Song lyrics content when provided.
speaker_count
categorical
Number of foreground speakers or vocalists when applicable: 1 or
2. Dialogue scenes support at most two speakers.
relation
short phrase
Speaker roles, turn-taking relation, or foreground interaction, such
as a host and guest or two commuters.
vocal
short phrase
Speaker identity descriptors, vocal timbre, delivery, emotion, ac-
cent, or recording coloration relevant to the foreground voice.
music
short phrase
Instrumentation, genre, tempo, mood, and relative role of music in
the scene.
sfx
short phrase
Discrete non-musical events, such as a door slam, train brakes,
keyboard taps, or rain impacts.
ambience
short phrase
Persistent environment and room-scale context, such as an indoor
station, kitchen room tone, or open coastline.
texture
short phrase
Mix and recording relationships: foreground prominence, masking,
reverberation, stereo impression, or dynamic behavior.
tions, but to normalize diverse descriptions into a fixed set of
fields that can be processed consistently by the text condition-
ing module. The structured representation covers acoustic type,
language, speech content or lyrics, speaker-related attributes,
music, sound events, ambience, and recording texture. Thus,
“rule-based templates” refers to the fixed conversion rules and
output schema, rather than unconstrained caption rewriting.
We formulate the conversion as constrained information ex-
traction. Given a natural-language annotation, the converter
retains the core summary supplied by the source annotation in
the summary field and maps the remaining explicitly stated in-
formation into the predefined structured fields. Quoted speech
and lyrics are copied verbatim when available, while unsup-
ported fields remain empty. The converter is prohibited from
introducing new events, speaker identities, emotions, acoustic
properties, or stylistic attributes that are not stated in the source
description.
The conversion follows a fixed schema and deterministic
field constraints. When automatic conversion is required, we
implement the constrained extractor with a language model
(Qwen3.5-35B-A3B with temperature set to 0.0) as a schema-
aware mapper and validator: it applies the predefined rules,
formats the output into the required structure, and checks for
invalid or unsupported fields. It does not perform free-form cap-
tion generation. This design allows both training annotations
and inference prompts to share the same structured interface
while preserving the semantics of the original natural-language
input.
The complete conversion instruction used by the extractor is
provided below.
Natural-to-Structured Conversion Prompt
You are a structured audio metadata extractor for a text-to-audio
model.
You receive a natural-language description of an audio clip. Your
task is to convert it into a JSON object following the exact schema
provided below.
STRICT RULES:
1. Output valid JSON only. Do not include markdown, explana-
tions, or extra text.
2. Use only the predefined field names in the schema. Do not add
new keys.
3. summary:
- Copy the source-provided core summary verbatim.
- Do not paraphrase, expand, or rewrite it.
- If the input contains separate summary and detailed-description
fields, use only the designated summary field.
- If no explicit core summary is provided, copy the original natural-
language description verbatim; do not generate a new summary.
4. speech:
- If spoken words are explicitly quoted, copy them exactly.
- Otherwise leave it empty.
- Do not create speech content for clips without human speech.
5. lyrics: fill only when song lyrics are explicitly provided. Other-
wise leave it empty.
6. Select exactly one type:
speech: dominant human speech;
13


singing: dominant singing or vocal performance;
music: non-vocal instrumental music;
sfx: discrete sound events such as impacts, machines, animals, or
weather;
mixed: two or more foreground acoustic categories among speech,
singing, music, and sound effects coexist and are jointly relevant;
unknown: insufficient information.
7. language:
- Use an ISO language code only when human speech or singing
is present.
- Otherwise leave it empty.
8. sfx should describe specific discrete events rather than generic
labels.
9. ambience describes persistent environmental background.
10. texture describes recording or acoustic characteristics only.
11. vocal describe voice characteristics only.
12. speaker_count must be one of: "1", "2", "unknown", or "".
13. music should describe only explicitly supported musical in-
formation, including instruments, rhythm, style, or mood when
available.
14. Do not infer missing information from world knowledge or
context. All unsupported fields must remain empty. All field val-
ues should be concise noun phrases rather than complete sen-
tences.
JSON Schema (output exactly this structure):
{ "summary": "", "type": "", "lang": "", "speech": "", "lyrics": "",
"speaker_count": "", "relation": "", "vocal": "", "music": "", "sfx":
"", "ambience": "", "texture": "" }
The extracted JSON representation is deterministically seri-
alized into the XML-like tagged text format consumed by the
text encoder; this serialization changes only the representation
format and does not add semantic information.
B.3
Public-Benchmark Prompt Rendering
For public benchmarks, the structured representation is used as
an interface normalization step rather than an additional source
of information. The original benchmark input remains the only
semantic source, and the conversion procedure does not access
reference audio or introduce additional acoustic descriptions.
For TTS benchmarks, transcripts are preserved exactly in the
speech field. The converter only adds schema-level information
such as the acoustic type, language identifier, and available
speaker metadata. No words, pronunciation details, or speaker
characteristics are generated beyond the original input.
For caption-based benchmarks, including AudioCaps, Mu-
sicCaps, and Song Describer, the original caption is retained
as the summary field. The structured converter maps the cap-
tion into the predefined fields and performs schema validation.
In particular, speech and lyrics are preserved verbatim when
explicitly present, while events, instruments, attributes, or emo-
tions not supported by the source caption are not introduced.
The same structured interface is used for training and in-
ference, but the benchmark conversion is applied only to the
publicly available text descriptions. Since the conversion does
not observe the target audio, the resulting structured caption
contains no information unavailable from the original bench-
mark input.
B.4
Prompt Templates for Unified Audio Scenes
The following templates illustrate the interface used during
training and inference. Bracketed fields are optional and omit-
ted when unsupported. A mixed scene explicitly contains at
least two of speech, music, singing, and sound effects.
Speech:
summary <type>speech</type>
<lang>LANG</lang> <speech>TEXT</speech>
<speaker_count>N</speaker_count>
<vocal>VOICE</vocal> [<ambience>ROOM</ambience>]
[<texture>MIX</texture>]
Music: summary <type>music</type> <music>INSTRUMENTS,
STYLE, TEMPO</music> [<texture>PRODUCTION</texture>]
Singing:
summary <type>singing</type>
<lang>LANG</lang> <lyrics>LYRICS</lyrics>
<vocal>VOCAL STYLE</vocal>
<music>ACCOMPANIMENT</music>
[<texture>MIX</texture>]
SFX: summary <type>sfx</type> <sfx>EVENTS</sfx>
<ambience>ENVIRONMENT</ambience> [<texture>RECORDING
CHARACTER</texture>]
Mixed
scene:
summary <type>mixed</type>
<lang>LANG</lang> <speech>TEXT</speech>
<speaker_count>N</speaker_count>
<vocal>VOICE</vocal> [<music>BED</music>]
[<sfx>EVENTS</sfx>] [<ambience>ENVIRONMENT</ambience>]
<texture>FOREGROUND–BACKGROUND RELATION</texture>
B.5
Representative Structured Prompts
Table 8 illustrates how the renderer preserves source informa-
tion. For TTS, the original speech content is placed directly in
speech without adding scene content. For TTA and TTM, the
original caption is retained verbatim as the first summary sen-
tence, with the remaining fields only reorganizing information
already present in that caption. The two complex-scene rows
show how speech or lyrics, music, sound effects, ambience, and
their foreground–background relation are represented together.
C
Training and Inference Details
C.1
Training Setup
The reported model is trained on approximately five million
clips of 10–15 seconds from an internal corpus exceeding
20,000 hours. The corpus combines speech, singing, music,
sound effects, and mixed recordings under the unified prompt
interface. The approximate content distribution is 20% speech,
5% singing, 10% music, 10% sound effects, and 55% mixed
recordings. We use the same data distribution, DiT backbone,
text encoder, and training budget for Dense, Base-MoE, and
SonicWeave; only the FFN/routing mechanism differs in the
controlled comparison.
The final training run used AdamW with a peak learning
rate of 7.5×10−5. The learning-rate schedule consists of the
configured linear warm-up followed by linear decay. Training
used fp16 mixed precision, with a global batch size of 512 and
one gradient-accumulation step, for 800,000 optimizer updates.
The trainer maintained an exponential moving average with
14


Table 8: Representative prompts. The examples illustrate the field semantics; they do not define a required set of fields for every sample.
Scenario
Structured prompt
TTS
plain English speech <type>speech</type> <lang>en</lang>
<speech>Keep walking along this road, then turn right at the second
intersection.</speech> <speaker_count>1</speaker_count> <vocal>adult
English voice, neutral tone</vocal>
TTA
A train arrives while people talk on a platform <type>sfx</type>
<sfx>train arriving, people talking</sfx> <ambience>train station
platform with crowd murmur</ambience>
TTM
Warm instrumental piano with slow chords <type>music</type>
<music>instrumental piano, slow warm chords</music> <texture>close studio
recording</texture>
Mixed
English race-engineer and driver radio dialogue at high speed
<type>mixed</type> <lang>en</lang> <speech>Box this lap; the rear
temperatures are climbing. / Copy, but the steering is vibrating
under braking. / Understood, stay off the inside curb.</speech>
<speaker_count>2</speaker_count> <relation>pit engineer advising a race
driver</relation> <vocal>controlled male engineer and strained male
driver through clipped team radio</vocal> <sfx>Engine roar, wind, tires,
and radio pops collide</sfx> <ambience>race car at speed with strong
wind trackside</ambience> <texture>driver transmission is noisier and
more distorted than the engineer response</texture>
decay 0.9999 after a 1,000-step warm-up. We selected the
final checkpoint for evaluation and used its EMA parameters
when available; no intermediate checkpoint was selected by a
validation-score sweep.
C.2
Conditioning Dropout and Reference Mask-
ing
For each training sample, a contiguous span whose fractional
length is sampled uniformly from [0.7,1.0] is selected from
valid latent frames. This region is zeroed in the reference con-
dition but remains visible in the clean target and flow objective.
The mechanism trains continuation and inpainting behavior
without changing the flow target.
Classifier-free guidance conditions are sampled as follows.
The audio reference is independently dropped with probability
0.3 and the caption with probability 0.1. Caption drop zeros
both text tokens and the pooled global text condition. When
audio reference is retained, LFM is restricted to the selected
masked span; when it is dropped, the loss is evaluated over
all valid frames. This makes the null branch a genuine text-
to-audio training condition rather than a masked-reference
reconstruction condition.
C.3
Adaptive Projected Guidance
At ODE state xt, let vc and vu denote the conditional and
unconditional velocity predictions evaluated at the same state.
Under the linear flow path, their clean-sample estimates are
µc = xt +(1−t)vc,
µu = xt +(1−t)vu.
(19)
We define ∆µ = µc −µu and apply reverse momentum,
f
∆µk = ∆µk +β f
∆µk−1,
β = −0.1,
(20)
with f
∆µ0 = ∆µ0. We decompose the smoothed guidance direc-
tion with respect to the conditional clean estimate:
∆µ∥= ⟨f
∆µ,µc⟩
∥µc∥2
2 +ε µc,
∆µ⊥= f
∆µ −∆µ∥.
(21)
The guided clean estimate is
µAPG = µu +w

∆µ⊥+η∆µ∥

,
(22)
and is converted back to velocity space as
vAPG =
µAPG −xt
max(1−t,10−5).
(23)
where w is the guidance scale. We use η = 0.85 for speech-
only generation and η = 0.5 when the requested scene contains
sound effects or music; the latter setting gave the best results
for these mixed conditions. APG is disabled when w < 10−5.
The unconditional pass uses dropped caption and dropped au-
dio reference; for masked-reference editing, the noisy-state
masking policy is applied consistently to that pass [33].
C.4
Sampling Protocol
Unless a task-specific protocol states otherwise, SonicWeave
uses Euler integration over 100 uniform time points from 0 to 1,
15


fixed random seed 42, no reference audio, and full-span latent
generation. The parallel inference entry point uses guidance
scale 4.5 for the reported generation path. The model supports a
cosine sway schedule at lower sampling budgets, but the public-
benchmark and Complex-Scene results should be generated
with the fixed protocol above rather than selecting a schedule
per example.
The audio waveform sample rate is 44.1 kHz, and the stereo
VAE has a temporal downsampling factor of 2048 samples
per latent frame. We use a pretrained stereo VAE based on the
Stable Audio 2.0 VAE architecture [27]. Public-benchmark de-
coding uses the duration requested by the corresponding bench-
mark protocol: generated latent length is set from the bench-
mark item or its task-specific maximum rather than silently
truncating all tasks to one common duration. The model de-
faults to generate 256 latent frames, corresponding to approx-
imately 11.89s at 44.1 kHz. Because the flow-matching DiT
operates on a variable-length latent sequence, it is not architec-
turally restricted to this default duration.
D
Evaluation Protocols
D.1
Public-Benchmark Protocols
We evaluate text-to-speech (TTS) on SeedTTS-eval and
LibriSpeech-PC test-clean, text-to-audio (TTA) on AudioCaps,
and text-to-music (TTM) on MusicCaps and Song Describer.
For TTS, we report word error rate (WER) on English bench-
marks and character error rate (CER) on Mandarin bench-
marks. TTA is evaluated using VGGish-based Fr’echet dis-
tance (FDVGG, also referred to as FAD), PaSST-based KL
divergence, and CLAP text–audio similarity. TTM is evalu-
ated using PaSST-based KL divergence and CLAP similar-
ity. Lower WER/CER, FDVGG, and KL indicate better perfor-
mance, whereas higher CLAP is better.
Each system generates one audio sample per evaluation item
under a common fixed-seed policy. WER/CER is computed be-
tween the benchmark transcript and an ASR transcription of the
generated audio after applying the official evaluation normaliza-
tion, including punctuation removal and English lowercasing.
CLAP is computed as the mean cosine similarity between the
text-prompt and generated-audio embeddings. FDVGG and KL
are aggregate metrics and are reported once for each bench-
mark set. The number of retained items is obtained from the
final evaluation manifest for each benchmark.
For TTS transcription, we follow the public SeedTTS/F5-
TTS evaluation pipeline, using faster-Whisper large-v3 [40]
for English and FunASR Paraformer-zh [41] for Man-
darin. For AudioCaps, FDVGG is computed using the de-
fault VGGish-based implementation in AVBench. PaSST KL
follows the Stable Audio Metrics implementation. CLAP
is evaluated with LAION-CLAP, using the general-audio
checkpoint 630k-audioset-fusion-best.pt for TTA and
music_speech_audioset_epoch_15_esc_89.98.pt for TTM.
D.2
Complex-Scene Suite
The Complex-Scene suite contains 100 prompts across four
categories: 45 speech-with-background cases, 10 singing-with-
background cases, 15 clean dialogue cases, and 30 dialogue-
with-background cases. It tests not only whether individual
components occur, but whether linguistic content, speaker
structure, music, sound effects, ambience, and foreground–
background relationships are jointly realized. The suite in-
cludes Mandarin and English prompts, with clean dialogue
serving as a control condition and the remaining categories
emphasizing coexistence, masking, and composition.
Each case has a natural-language prompt and a paired struc-
tured prompt. The natural-language form specifies the complete
target scene in ordinary prose. The structured form reorga-
nizes the same specification into the fields of Table 7; it does
not add new target events. Public systems receive the natural-
language form in their native interface. SonicWeave, Dense,
and Base-MoE receive the paired structured form. This setup
evaluates structured conditioning and CPE-MoE under the
same requested semantics while avoiding unsupported claims
of identical tokenizer-level inputs across unrelated public sys-
tems.
Representative cases are listed in Table 8. They include
speech–background, singing–background, clean dialogue, and
dialogue–background conditions, with both continuous back-
ground layers and short high-salience events. The suite there-
fore tests whether a system preserves foreground speech or
singing while realizing local acoustic departures and their in-
tended foreground–background relation.
D.3
Reference-Free Judge Rubric
We use gemini-3.1-pro-preview as a blind audio judge
when a reference recording is unavailable. The judge receives
one generated audio clip, the natural-language prompt, and the
paired structured specification. Its instruction is: “Listen to the
audio first; score only audible evidence against the requested
scene; do not credit an event solely because it appears in the
prompt; return the required JSON fields.” The system/model
name is not supplied.
Each applicable dimension is scored on a five-point ordinal
scale represented internally as 1–5: 1 denotes absent, contra-
dictory, or completely wrong; 2 mostly wrong with limited
relevant evidence; 3 partially correct with substantial omis-
sions or errors; 4 mostly correct with minor omissions; and 5
fully and accurately realized. The seven dimensions are:
• Speech content: required words and language;
• Vocal attributes: speaker type, emotion, energy, delivery,
and style;
• Speaker structure: count, identity separation, turns, and
assignment;
• Background adherence: requested music, events, and
ambience;
16


Table 9: Targeted routing ablations on representative benchmarks. All variants share the same backbone, training data, expert configuration, and
training budget. Complex-scene results use the same reference-free automatic judging protocol as the main evaluation.
Variant
SeedTTS
AudioCaps
Song Describer
Complex Scene
En WER↓Zh CER↓
FAD↓
KL↓
CLAP↑
KL↓
CLAP↑
AI-Tech↑
AI-Sem↑
Fixed gate (gj = 0.5, C = 4)
2.1%
1.8%
3.69
1.54
0.448
0.53
0.31
4.60
4.35
CPE-MoE (C = 8)
1.4%
0.9%
2.91
1.29
0.469
0.44
0.33
4.69
4.64
CPE-MoE (C = 4)
1.0%
0.8%
2.75
1.26
0.475
0.36
0.44
4.79
4.72
• Acoustic relation: prominence, masking, timing, overlap,
and interaction;
• Scene coherence: whether components form a plausible
integrated scene; and
• Technical quality: clipping, distortion, discontinuity,
abrupt cuts, and synthesis artifacts.
For clean dialogue, background-adherence and acoustic-
relation are marked not applicable rather than treated as zeros.
The semantic score is the mean of all applicable first six dimen-
sions; technical quality is retained separately.
The judge must return a short audible-evidence string for
every score, detected languages, detected speaker count, an
ordered transcript where applicable, detected background el-
ements, and a confidence score. Outputs failing the required
JSON schema or score ranges are rejected and retried. Temper-
ature is zero to reduce sampling variation.
D.4
Human Listening Study
The listening study presents every system output anonymously.
For each case, available clips are assigned anonymous iden-
tifiers and their order is randomized with a fixed study seed.
The private identifier-to-system mapping is not shared with
listeners. Listeners score each clip independently on two 1–5
scales:
• MOS-Q (quality): 1 is nearly unusable due to severe noise,
clipping, distortion, discontinuity, or unintelligibility; 2
has major persistent artifacts that substantially impair
listening; 3 is basically listenable with noticeable artifacts;
4 is clear and stable with only minor artifacts; 5 is clear,
natural, stable, and nearly artifact-free.
• MOS-R (request realization): 1 means that the requested
scene is essentially absent or contradictory; 2 means that
only isolated requested elements are recognizable while
key content or relations are missing; 3 means major re-
quested content is present but with clear omissions or in-
correct relationships; 4 means nearly all requested content
and relations are realized with minor omissions; 5 means
foreground speech, music, events, ambience, timing, and
relative prominence are jointly and naturally realized.
The listening study used 25 listener responses. Every listener
received the same questionnaire containing 25 cases and six
anonymously shuffled system outputs per case, for 150 clips
and 300 ordinal ratings (MOS-Q and MOS-R) per completed
response. The study script randomizes clip order within each
case with seed 42, hides the system mapping, and provides
written 1–5 scoring instructions. The aggregation excludes
ratings with missing mappings or values outside [1,5]. MOS
results are reported as mean ± standard deviation.
E
Targeted Routing Ablations
E.1
Scope and Evaluation Protocol
The main paper compares SonicWeave with matched Dense
and Base-MoE controls. Targeted ablations isolate two specific
CPE-MoE design choices rather than exhaustively decompos-
ing all architectural factors. Every ablation retains the same
data, backbone width/depth, number of routed layers, expert
count, top-K, optimizer schedule, training budget, prompt inter-
face, and sampling protocol unless the row explicitly changes
one variable.
All ablation variants are evaluated with objective met-
rics across TTS, TTA, TTM, and Complex-Scene reference-
free judging. We report English WER and Mandarin CER,
AudioCaps FAD/KL/CLAP, Song Describer KL/CLAP, and
Complex-Scene AI-Tech/AI-Sem. Human MOS is reserved for
the main model comparison and is not used to rank targeted
ablations.
E.2
Fixed Prior–Evidence Fusion
The fixed-fusion control replaces the learned chunk gate by
gj = 0.5 for every valid chunk, layer, prompt, and diffusion
phase:
ℓj = 0.5ℓprior +0.5ℓevid
j
.
(24)
It retains C = 4 and all remaining CPE-MoE components. This
control tests whether adaptive, content- and phase-dependent
fusion improves over a uniform average. It does not separately
identify the causal contribution of the prior branch or evidence
branch, because both are still present. The reported table shows
that this control is consistently worse than the learned gate:
English WER and Chinese CER increase, AudioCaps FAD/K-
L/CLAP degrade, Song Describer KL/CLAP degrade, and
Complex-Scene AI-Tech/AI-Sem decrease. The degradation is
especially clear on TTS, which is consistent with a uniform fu-
sion rule limiting the adaptive balance between the text-derived
prior and evolving acoustic evidence.
17


Figure 4: Phase- and content-conditioned expert usage. Mean
dispatch fractions are shown for each content type over the early,
middle, and late thirds of the diffusion trajectory. Content-specific
preferences persist across phases, while the degree of concentration
changes as generation proceeds.
E.3
Chunk-Size Sensitivity
The C = 8 variant is broadly comparable to C = 4 on pub-
lic benchmarks, but is consistently worse on every displayed
TTS, AudioCaps, and Song Describer metric. The difference is
modest for globally coherent content, such as sustained music,
because a longer chunk can still share a suitable expert path.
However, each C = 8 assignment constrains twice as many
neighboring latent frames as C = 4. This reduces the routing
frequency available to react to short events, speaker turns, or
local changes in foreground–background balance. The effect
is clearest on Complex-Scene, where linguistic content and
transient acoustic events must be jointly realized. Conversely,
smaller chunks would increase routing overhead and can frag-
ment a locally coherent acoustic event. We therefore use C = 4
as the trade-off between local adaptivity, short-range routing
consistency, and sparse-dispatch efficiency.
F
Additional Routing Analyses
F.1
Routing-Analysis Protocol
We construct a balanced 250-prompt routing benchmark with
50 prompts each for speech, sound effects, music, singing, and
mixed scenes. Speech is balanced across SeedTTS English and
Chinese examples; sound effects use AudioCaps; music and
singing use MusicCaps; mixed examples use prompts from
complex-scene test sets. Each item is assigned a fixed prompt
identifier and a maximum frame length appropriate to its source,
preventing a content type from being overrepresented solely
through longer sequences.
For every routed layer, generation step, and valid chunk, we
record the conflict gate, posterior routing distribution, and top-
K dispatch. All aggregate statistics are first averaged within
each prompt and then across prompts, so that long clips or clips
containing more valid chunks do not receive disproportionate
weight.
F.2
Phase- and Content-Conditioned Expert Us-
age
Figure 4 reports mean expert dispatch fractions for each content
type during the early, middle, and late thirds of the generation
trajectory. The dispatch patterns depend jointly on content and
phase. Speech retains a strong preference for E0, while singing
consistently uses E3 more heavily. Sound effects, music, and
mixed scenes exhibit sharper preferences early in generation
and become more balanced as the sample is refined. Thus, the
routed experts do not form a single static partition of the train-
ing domains: their relative utilization evolves during generation
while preserving persistent content-dependent tendencies.
F.3
Does the Gate Control the Effective Router?
The conflict gate is designed to interpolate the prior and evi-
dence logits, but this definition alone does not show whether
trained gates occupy a useful operating range or materially
alter the resulting routing distribution. We therefore bin valid
chunks by gj and measure the Jensen–Shannon divergence
(JSD) between the fused posterior distribution and each of its
two inputs. As shown in Figure 6, low-gate chunks remain
close to the global prior and comparatively far from local evi-
dence. The relation reverses for high-gate chunks: the posterior
approaches the evidence distribution and departs sharply from
the prior. Intermediate bins provide a smooth transition be-
tween these regimes. This aggregate behavior confirms that the
learned gate controls the effective routing distribution accord-
ing to its intended prior-to-evidence semantics.
F.4
Representative Mixed-Scene Routing Case
Figure 5 presents a representative case from the demo
set
(prompt
identifier
cpe_010: “In a busy gym, a
trainer shouts, ‘Three more reps, you’ve got
this! Keep your core tight. Two more!’ Weight
plates clank, treadmills run, people breathe
heavily, and battle ropes strike the floor
around him.”) The scene combines foreground speech
with continuous machine and breathing noise, together with
transient or quasi-periodic impacts. It therefore provides
a natural test of within-clip routing under overlapping
heterogeneous content.
18


Figure 5: Conflict-gate dynamics and mixed-scene routing. The gym scene cpe_010, showing the gate averaged over four CPE layers and
Layer 13 top-1 expert assignments. Complex background regions rely more on acoustic evidence, while the main speech segment shows stronger
reliance on the text prior.
Figure 6: Gate-controlled prior–evidence routing. Valid chunks are
grouped by their conflict-gate values. At low gj, the fused posterior is
close to the global prior; at high gj, it is close to local evidence. JSD
denotes Jensen–Shannon divergence.
The upper trace shows the conflict gate averaged over the
four CPE-MoE layers, whereas the colored strip visualizes top-
1 dispatch from a single routed layer (Layer 13). We include
one layer to keep the visualization readable; the layer is used
only as an illustrative dispatch trace and is not intended to
summarize routing behavior across all routed layers.
The trace shows a coarse but interpretable correspondence
between the acoustic composition and the routing behavior.
During the earlier portion of the clip, the scene is dominated by
dense background activity, including machine noise, breathing,
and transient impacts. In this region, the mean gate is mostly
above 0.5, indicating stronger reliance on the evolving acoustic
evidence. The Layer 13 dispatch trace also switches experts
more frequently around local acoustic changes, consistent with
chunk-level adaptation to heterogeneous and transient content.
Around 7 seconds, the main speech segment becomes promi-
nent in both the spectrogram and the corresponding demo audio.
This transition coincides with a sustained decrease of the mean
gate below 0.5, shifting the routing toward the structured text
prior, which provides a stable description of the foreground
speech. The expert assignments simultaneously enter longer,
more stable runs. Near the end of the clip, as the background
activity becomes more prominent again, the gate rises and the
expert pattern changes accordingly.
Although the correspondence is not frame-exact, the case
illustrates the intended behavior of CPE-MoE: local acoustic
evidence plays a larger role in complex and rapidly changing
regions, whereas the global text prior becomes more influential
during semantically well-specified speech segments.
19
